

CHAPTER NINE
FORGIVENESS 

"The heart that can't forgive is not the only one who loses, ‘cause when the root of bitterness takes hold, the one who suffers most of all is you" - Forgiveness by David Crossman.

What it is. What it isn’t.

Wait! Don't skip this chapter. Please! It's the most critical chapter in the entire book. When anyone mentions forgiveness, most people plug their ears and run away. NOTE: Running with your ears plugged and eyes closed invariably produces terrible results. 

There is a misconception that forgiveness means you have to forget people wounded you and you're supposed to act like everything is hunky dory. Nothing could be further from the truth. Forgiveness is, first and foremost, a gift for you! As mentioned in the quote above, the one who suffers most in unforgiveness is not the one who hurt you, not the attorneys, the judge, or the new guy in your Ex’s life. The one who really suffers is you. All those others have moved on, unbound by whether or not you choose to forgive them. The only one left wrapped in chains of unforgiveness is you.

The only one who can break those chains is you. So, forgiveness of others is not something you do for them; it’s for yourself. This is how you begin to let go of things beyond your control and release yourself from the grip of anger that can only turn into bitterness, which hardens the heart and prevents you from moving on. If you choose to nurture that anger and the resentment it produces, you allow those who wounded you to retain their hold on you; in effect, you give them the keys to your cell which holds your heart captive. You won’t be open to new relationships and opportunities that present themselves. 

By not forgiving the people who have hurt you, you may fool yourself into thinking you’re punishing them or exacting some perverse justice. You’re not. You’re simply letting the hooks they have in you dig deeper and scar over. This means you’re constantly on the lookout for the slightest offense, meaning you’ve given them the power to push your buttons and flip out at perceived injustice, sending you into a rage any time they choose. So who’s in control? Certainly not you; you’re out of control, emotionally dependent on someone else, and totally exposed to being manipulated by them.

As a case in point, my grandfather cheated on my grandmother when my mom was a teenager. It brought terrific devastation to the home and eventually resulted in divorce. My mom was broken for a time, especially when her father married his young secretary, and it took her some time to heal. But my grandmother held onto her anger and bitterness. She wanted to punish him for hurting her. She had several marriage proposals from some amazing guys throughout her life which she refused, to keep my grandfather paying alimony. She felt like she was sticking it to him and making him suffer like he had made her suffer. She had created her form of justice, so she spent the next forty years miserable and unable to forgive. 

When I spoke with her shortly before she passed, she told me her greatest regret in life had been that she did not pardon my grandfather sooner. She would never forget what he had done to her, but she would have let go of the bitterness and anger and would have lived free of those chains, open to many prospects of happiness. 

No matter what someone has done to us, they do not deserve the satisfaction of making us suffer for the rest of our lives because of it. The most excellent way to "stick it" to the people who have hurt us is to let go and move on. She had left the relationship behind, but the relationship never left her. 

Forgiveness is when we recognize someone has wronged us and— however deserving we are of justice and the offender of punishment—we surrender the ultimate judgment to God. Someone may say surrendering it to the universe, but what is an offering to the universe other than giving our right to justice to a higher power? Forgiveness is when we accept that we will never be able to deliver the appropriate punishment, and our judgment will be clouded by anger and hatred. There will be justice, and there will be consequences, but we are not the Judge who will, in His own good time, administer them.

Here is a quick test to see if I am speaking the truth. If a flashy-looking dude in an expensive BMW with short-cropped black hair and faded sides cuts you off in an intersection and nearly causes you to crash, what's the first thing you wish would happen to him? Was the punishment more extraordinary than the offense? Did you wish someone would cut him off next time, or did you wish that his car would crash and he would explode in a ball of fire? 

Our initial reaction to any wrong done to us is immediate punishment and retribution. If every individual were to get the justice they seek, the world would be devoid of people. We would all have been taken out by someone else's justice. 

I stood up a girl who had invited me to her senior prom because I had started dating someone else between the time she had asked me to take her and the spring when her prom was set to take place. My new girlfriend wasn't okay with me going to this other girl's prom, even though I had promised six months before I would. I felt terrible, and I apologized profusely, but I knew my prom date would have instantly reduced me to ashes, and my soul would be eternally damned. I'm grateful she chose to forgive me instead. 

I threw a rock at my mother once. Had my dad acted on his impulse, I probably wouldn't be here today. Instead, he restrained himself. There were consequences, but they were reasonable and ultimately led to forgiveness and a lesson learned.

There is an element of forgiveness that recognizes the humanity in the perpetrator, our connectedness to them, and ultimately, the benefit to all of us when we forgive. 

Forgiveness defies logic. Forgiveness isn't natural, and it isn't earned. It is most certainly never deserved. True forgiveness is supernatural and divine. 

We've all seen court cases when the loved ones of a victim somehow find it within themselves to forgive the perpetrator. I've even seen the forgiven perpetrator sneer completely unrepentantly. Then, other times, I have seen them break down in tears. Forgiveness is less about the forgiven than the forgiver. When you forgive, that forgiveness can’t be conditional on the response of the forgiven. What they do with it is their issue.

But what about the people who have wronged us beyond measure? What about the Russians who invaded Ukraine, burned villages, and cut down women and children? What about the terrorists who invaded Israel and executed heinous atrocities? What about people who have enslaved people and harvested organs? Forgiveness isn't condoning the evils people have done. Forgiveness doesn't change the fact that people deserve punishment. Forgiveness doesn't mean you forget what someone did to you and stop letting it affect you. Forgiveness doesn't mean you will continually allow the other person to keep harming you. For grave offenses, forgiveness is not a quick, one-time deal. It is a process that we must practice daily until the wrong no longer affects our hearts and souls. That can take years, even a lifetime. 


Forgiveness Starts With You

One of the lessons I learned when I was going through my divorce was that I needed to forgive myself. A few years after I had finalized my separation, I was seeing a young nurse. She stunned me one day when we went for a walk by asking me if I genuinely believed I deserved to be loved. 
"Of course I do," I replied.
"Are you sure? Because I don't believe you." 
I was offended by the question because I considered myself to be a very confident person. But that led me to the question of whether I loved myself. To believe I deservedto be loved, I first had to love myself. Would anyone who truly loves themselves let themselves be treated as poorly as I allowed myself to be? 

It took me a while to accept that something deep down inside me didn't believe I deserved better. I traced the source to two separate recurring events. By nature, I am an exceedingly happy person. The joy of the Lord is my strength, and no matter what I face, I am overly optimistic. 

One day, I came home from school, and my father asked me how school was. I told him it was great because the other kids had only beaten me twice that day. I meant it. It was a great day. I’d usually get beaten three or four times, so I saw that day as a positive development. You see, I tend to talk more and listen less when I get excited. That is a problem in a class or relationship with people who expect you to listen. The happier I got, the more frustrated others became, to the point I was always in trouble. 

When I began talking too much or having trouble focusing, the teacher would put me in the No Fun Corner, which was great fun. The light cast perfect shadows, and my shadow puppets were incredible! I made shadow movies and was so excited that the other kids also asked to go to the No Fun Corner. Then, my teacher put me into the hallway. There were so many wonderful people to entertain in the hallway, and I couldn't let them down! That would have been terrible of me. 
From the hallway, they put me into the bathroom. Unfortunately for my poor teacher, the acoustics in the bathroom were brilliant, and my lungs were ready to impress. She didn't know the bathroom was connected to vents in the surrounding rooms, so the performance enthralled everyone. People greeted me enthusiastically, "He's such a wonderful boy, but…" As I grew, it turned into, "He has so much potential, but…" I thrived when enjoying myself and being challenged, but I withered when bored or untested. The issue stayed with me well into my sophomore year of college.

Then something changed. I found something I loved to do with everything in me. Make movies. It saved me. I became an A student, got my equivalent of a four year master's degree, taught at university, won an Emmy, and did professional studies in AI through MIT. And while I had been successful outwardly, those earlier years had left an underlying feeling of disappointment and the sensation that I was not enough. I chose to believe I was the problem, and if I just applied myself a little more, was more attentive, made more money, or didn't forget things, then I would be "successful." My focus shifted from being happy and content with who I was and what I was creating to my entire value being what I could provide or do for someone else. Some of that shift is okay; becoming less selfish is good. But constantly feeling like you have to live up to the expectations of others is soul-draining. The more I tried to please others, the less I became myself. I wasn’t being genuine; I was being accommodating.

It broke me, and when I continually let people down, it made me feel worse about myself. I felt like a failure, no matter what I did, and that pain went deep, so deep that I had gotten to the point where I didn't feel like I deserved to be loved. What a horrible place to be! 

Maybe that doesn’t describe you and your situation. Fine. But if you do tend to tie your value as a man to your ability to satisfy the expectations of others, and the harder you try, the less you seem to satisfy, it might be because you’ve lost yourself in the effort. Maybe you’ve gotten to the point where you don’t even know who you are. Perhaps that’s the reason so many men are checking out and walking away from anything of true meaning and drowning themselves in superficial activities: video games, drugs, drinking, porn, the hookup culture. 

Your pain and anger are real, and it's not just you that's dealing with it. We all are. And to break free from the cycle of self-blame and anger, I had to forgive myself. I had to believe I was worthy of love. I couldn't figure out how to do that until, one day, I was looking at myself in the mirror. I had just finished washing my face, and the water was pouring down from my eyebrows and onto my cheeks, making it appear as if I had been crying. Suddenly, it occurred to me that there was a little boy inside of the masculine exterior who just wanted to be loved, who was hurting and rejected, looking at himself, wondering what was so terrible about him that he was worth leaving. I knew I would never let that little kid get hurt like that again. I didn't deserve it.

I looked at the man in the mirror and said, "I love you. And I forgive you." The natural tears started flowing. The ache began to break open like a fissure, and the years of loathing poured out. I forgave myself. I forgave myself for failing. I forgave myself for not having better boundaries. I forgave myself for not feeling like I was enough. And in the process, I confirmed what was true. I did love myself. I had shoved it so deeply into the corners of my obedient and serving mind that I ignored my bleeding heart.

I challenge you to try this: not necessarily the crying part, but if tears come, let ‘em come.

On those days when you are hard on yourself or feel like a complete failure, remind yourself that you are a living, walking, breathing miracle created in the image of God, who incidentally made the universe. That’s a pretty good place to start. Be honest with Him. If you blew it, say, “Lord, I blew it. I’m sorry. Forgive me,” and He will. So you’re clean. You’re forgiven. You can now forgive yourself, and when you do, you’ll find there’s a never-ending surplus of God’s forgiveness left over. 

Since you can’t magically generate love from within yourself, tap into that surplus forgiveness and extend it to others. You might do so through gritted teeth at first, but over time and with practice, it will become real, and so will the healing it brings. 


Forgiveness is a Journey, Not A Destination

Forgiveness is not a one-time occasion, especially when the people hurting us are still inflicting pain on us through our children, our finances, verbal or physical abuse, or neglect and abandonment. The wounds we suffer from a broken relationship can continue for years, even decades. So, thinking about forgiveness as a daily practice, like brushing your teeth and getting gas for your car, will prepare you for the perseverance necessary to forgive fully and be free. It's a process. But how can I do that when they are the ones who should be asking me for forgiveness? 

When someone hurts me, my gut reaction is to lash out and punish them. I want to see them suffer for what they have done to me, and I want it to hurt worse than it hurts me so they will never do it again. I want… no, I demand instant justice. Any justice that is not immediate and severe only serves to increase my frustration, except for when I am in the wrong. When I am the one responsible, I want mercy and grace. I want forgiveness. I'm only human, after all. It's as easy to demand just retribution on others as it is to conveniently forget all of the times I've been deserving of justice myself. 

If you have ever done something stupid that hurt someone, raise your hand. If your hand isn’t raised, you’re not being honest with yourself. If you are being honest, you know that you want mercy regarding your guilt. How, then, do we balance the mercy we wish for with the mercy we’re unwilling to give? 

To answer that question, I look at Christ hanging on the cross, the perfect example of love and forgiveness. What the Bible says about His sacrifice in the most often quoted verse of John 3:16 is "For God so loved the world that He gave His one and only son, that whosoever would believe in Him should not perish, but have everlasting life." Whether you are a Christian or not, this perfectly illustrates what it means to forgive. The Bible also goes on to say that while Jesus was hanging on the cross, naked and beaten, the soldiers at His feet casting lots for His clothes while bleeding from a pierced side said, "Father forgive them, for they know not what they do." From a human perspective, I’m pretty sure they knew exactly what they were doing. They were hanging a man for claiming to be God, whipping up an auction for His garments, and waiting for Him to die. But Jesus' perspective was supernatural. He was looking beyond the outward actions of the men and women at His feet and at the spirit behind the attacks. 

They did not understand that they were killing the son of God. They did not understand they were trapped in sin and held hostage by a curse handed down to them from generation to generation. They did not fathom what He had come to do and how Jesus' death and resurrection would set them free. And He wasn't just forgiving the people killing Him. He was forgiving us, all past, present, and future. He pardoned us and set us free from the prison we daily build around ourselves, with walls that grow ever-thicker and bars that become even stronger.  

The Old Testament book of Psalms 103, verses 7-12, says:
 
"The Lord is compassionate and gracious,
slow to anger, abounding in love.
He will not always accuse,
nor will he harbor his anger forever;
he does not treat us as our sins deserve
or repay us according to our iniquities.
For as high as the heavens are above the earth,
so great is his love for those who fear him;
as far as the east is from the west,
so far has he removed our transgressions from us."

We were not treated, like the people who had killed him, as our sins deserved because none of us would be able to stand. And whether you believe in Karma or Cosmic Care, who would ever be able to say they were perfect enough to achieve paradise? No one. So, when I approach forgiveness, it is more of a requirement than a choice. I don't just choose to forgive them. I must forgive them. I must let go of my desire to do justice the way I want it done and allow the perfect judge to rule on my behalf. By letting go of my right to justice, I free myself to move on. To set good boundaries and allow better people into my life. I am free to cut all the hooks off me and cast them into the fire, along with the photo albums and wedding rings. Like painful memorabilia, we must throw away and burn the emotional and spiritual chains through the power of forgiveness. 


No Future Without Forgiveness

Forgiveness is a difficult concept to understand and infinitely more complex to implement consistently. And right now, you might say, "You don't understand what so and so did to me." Or "She hurt me too deeply. I can never forgive her for what she did." And you might be right. I might not be able to understand how deeply you have been hurt or abused, so let's not just take my word for it. Let's look at the representations of the deputy chair of the Truth and Reconciliation Comission and the author of No Future Without Forgiveness. 

For those of you who don't know, Archbishop Desmond Tutu was a leader in the civil rights movement in South Africa and marched alongside Nelson Mandela in his Long Walk to Freedom. During apartheid, horrific attacks were committed by both sides, with the ruling class kidnapping people in the middle of the night and murdering them, and the other side setting fire to homes, burning everyone inside alive. With such devastating horror inflicted on their fellowman, how could anyone find healing or the strength to forgive? 

Since the beginning of time, humanity has faced this challenge. Our inability to forgive generally results in the next generation, who witnessed the travesties inflicted on their people, picking up the plow and beating it into a sword. The cycle of violence continues. If we do not deal with our anger and unforgiveness today, we will likely see it in our children's lives, too. I don't want my daughter to grow up in the shadow of my hurt and anguish. I want her to love her mother and to be able to do that guilt-free with no resistance from me. 

Just a few years earlier, Rwanda experienced a similar, horrific conflict between the Hutu majority and Tutsi minority, claiming over 800,000 lives. Anger and unforgiveness had consumed an entire generation.
Mandela and Tutu sought to prevent such a tragedy in South Africa. They embraced the concept of Ubuntu, a belief in a universal bond of sharing that connects all humanity. This philosophy emphasizes that what harms one harms all, and we are responsible for each other's well-being, regardless of our differences. This echoes Christ's ultimate act of forgiveness on the cross.


Past, present, and future forgiveness is the key to treasures that won’t manifest themselves until we apply it. These advantages include peace that passes understanding, a greater love for yourself and others, and freedom from unforgiveness. Lightness and joy will replace the burden and endless cycle of unforgiveness, allowing you to accept your flaws and take ownership of your future. You are entitled to retribution, but there is the mercy to let go. You are allowing justice to be served on a macro level instead of an individual micro level. The healing reverberates throughout time, closing past wounds or at least mitigating future ones.

Tutu's idea was to create a Truth and Reconciliation Commission where the people who committed crimes against their fellow compatriots could come and confess what they had done. Instead of facing justice, they would receive mercy and be forgiven, but they would have to admit everything. If the perpetrators had hidden anything, they would receive the full force of the law. 

The stories are heartbreaking. You can read them on any site dedicated to posting all the transcripts. Numerous stories recount instances of men enduring testicle injuries, lynchings, fires, and torture. These stories often depict a striking phenomenon: those who suffered these tragedies sometimes forgave the individuals responsible. As much as we want the people who hurt us to suffer, we all must forgive them, not for their sake only, but for ours. Forgiveness is the breaking of chains. 

Sadly, most of the generation that had experienced those trials has passed, and the current generation has forgotten the lessons. Many testimonials were lost, ignored, or ridiculed. Again, there is a race war, and hostilities are rising. 

The repercussions of hatred and unforgiveness are not confined to South Africa. Anger and resentment boil over worldwide, stoking our bitterness and turning us against each other. Forgiveness, especially when it is undeserved, is a powerful deterrent to hatred and bitterness. The impact can be felt not only in our own lives but in the lives of the people we interact with. The choice to forgive daily makes us men of peace and strength. It can lead to peace and away from war, whether it be a war in our family or between nations and people. We forgive, but don't forget. We set limitations that prevent or limit other's ability to hurt us, and in cases when we cannot stop the oppressor physically, we can ultimately be mentally and eternally free from their actions through forgiveness.

Whose Law Are We Living By Anyway?

I know what I say is difficult, if not near impossible. How do you forgive the person sitting across from you in court trying to take your money, children, and heart? How do you forgive someone who left you, cheated on you, or continually put you down? 

Some believe we make the best judges because we fully grasp all moral laws and know the best solutions. We think we're in the right, and they are in the wrong. They broke their promise to us, so they deserve to suffer. They committed murder, so they should face death. For millennia, justice defaulted to the principle of an eye for an eye. Then Jesus came along and declared, "You will face judgment the same way you judge others." Perhaps you're comfortable with that notion. You might say, "If I kill someone, then I deserve to be killed." That sounds fair. But Jesus also said, "If you look at a woman lustfully, you have already committed adultery with her in your heart." He also stated, "You have heard that our ancestors were told, 'You must not murder. If you commit murder, you are subject to judgment.' But I say, if you are even angry with someone, you are subject to judgment! If you call someone an idiot, you are in danger of being brought before the court. And if you curse someone, you are in danger of the fires of hell.’" Matthew 5:21. 

Wait, what? If I look at a woman lustfully or if I call someone an idiot or curse them, someone can condemn me? 

Even if you do not agree with or believe the words of Jesus and you subscribe to the idea of Karma or some other form of retribution, the fact of the matter exists that the laws of what is right or wrong and the disbursement of judgment for their infraction exist beyond my ability to understand. I am not the sole judge of right and wrong, and there may be a law above and beyond my comprehension that I am breaking, even without knowing. We have all experienced guilt or conviction for something we said or did. Even when not caught, we've had to grapple with the consequences, and if there are no apparent consequences, there is always that man in the mirror we have to face every day.

Forgiveness ultimately recognizes that we are all guilty of breaking moral laws. And, if justice is true, then we are deserving of punishment. Forgiveness also comes from a place where we acknowledge the fallibility of the entire human race, past, present, and future. By forgiving, we extend some of the grace that will be shown to us from others, deserving or not, and we allow the grace of God to heal the wounds caused by others. 


A Two or Three-Way Street

Forgiveness is a two or three-way street. When we forgive others, we open our hearts to allow God to heal the wounds inflicted on us. We open ourselves to receive the gifts of life that come from forgiveness: grace, mercy, and peace - both within ourselves and with others. Whether the other person accepts or rejects your forgiveness is irrelevant. This two-way street of forgiveness has nothing to do with those who harmed us. The one who forgives and is merciful also receives forgiveness and mercy for what they have done, known and unknown. 

We contribute to our faults by believing we haven't done anything deserving of punishment or are good people immune to judgment. Forgiveness is acknowledging our flaws, accepting the grace we have received for them, and extending that grace to others. Regardless of the result, we become a conduit for healing, love, and benefit to those who have hurt us. 

When forgiveness becomes a three-way street, and the person who has wronged you receives forgiveness and, in return, repents and turns from their transgression, they also receive the undeserved gift of mercy. They receive universal love, too, which heals the deepest wounds and convicts the hardest of hearts. If anyone is ever going to have a hope of change, it comes when they receive unconditional love or unmerited grace - when they know they are wrong and deserve punishment, but instead they receive love and grace. That love doesn't come from you. It flows through you with the power to heal you, and if they receive it, those who hurt you are healed in the process.

I saw this work in my own life. I was deeply hurt. What my Ex had done devastated me. But, I had chosen from the beginning to forgive through the whole divorce process. Of course, there were days I wanted her to combust spontaneously, but for my own sake and the sake of my daughter, I fought through those feelings and insisted on forgiving. In the end, forgiving created an open heart during the time needed to heal the damage. 

My daughter never saw me get angry or speak hatefully against her mom. I diverted her questions about why her mother had left back to her mom. "You need to ask her that." Forgiveness allowed me to speak to the issues below the surface that were affecting everything instead of dealing with the emotional decisions made during a divorce. 

About ten years later, my Ex apologized for everything that had happened. I didn't need it because I had already forgiven her and moved on, but it was a warm and welcoming report. Because we had taken the healing path, we could set our differences aside and now pray for each other and our families. We work together to solve problems and speak respectfully to each other. No, we don't hang out and spend tons of time together. We might speak two or three times a year now, but it is amiable and constructive when we do. I largely owe the healing in my own heart to choosing to forgive from the start, no matter how much I wanted immediate retribution. Also, because I had taken the more challenging path and worked through the pain, I was ready when Rei, the woman who became my wife, came along. It's been a fantastic relationship, and I didn't bring bitterness and anger from unforgiveness into it.

Food For Thought

What are the areas in my life where I have unforgiveness and resentment? 
Can I start forgiving those people who have hurt me today? 
Who am I willing to forgive, and who am I not? What is the difference?
Have I ever done anything like that to someone else? 
How can forgiving my Ex, father, mother, etc., help me start to heal? How will that affect my children, and is it worth it?
If I cannot forgive, who does it hurt?
Where does my sense of justice and what is right and wrong come from? 
What laws have I violated?
If I died today, would I be judged for the laws I have broken in my life? Would the result be good or bad? 
Has anyone forgiven you when you didn’t deserve it?


Forgiveness has the transformative power to bring healing and joy despite the pain and is a primary gift to oneself. It is crucial in liberating ourselves from resentment and breaking us free from self-blame and anger. It’s a powerful tool on your recovery journey, and you can use it, but you must choose, on a daily basis, to do so! 
