

CHAPTER FIVE
WHAT BOUNDARIES?



“Boundaries are basically about providing structure, and structure is essential to building anything that thrives?” - Dr. Henry Cloud.


In the physical world, boundaries, which you might also call borders, are easy to see. Many are clearly defined, whether property lines, roads, river banks, or even the inside of a car versus the outside. Yet, when it comes to relationships, boundaries are not so easily defined - and they might even change from moment to moment if they exist at all - more of a minefield than a healthy border. This chapter will examine one of the truths that profoundly affected my healing and helped me become a much better, more content man. 

I enjoyed working with Henry Cloud as the Content Producer for the nationally syndicated Dave Ramsey talk show. Henry Cloud and Dr. John Townsend wrote the New York Times best-selling book Boundaries, and let me tell you, this book rocked my world. It was primarily because it never occurred to me that I had boundary issues, and that fact contributed significantly to the breakdown of my first marriage. It also was one of the primary reasons it took me such a long time to heal. The book showed me how I had few personal emotional boundaries; I had difficulty saying no, especially to my Ex. I often work to make others happy because I am naturally joyful and want them to be delighted. Allow me to elucidate.

I am an agreeable sort of chap. This likely stems from moving many times as a kid, which meant I was often the ‘new kid,’ and being the new guy frequently made me a target. One of the easiest and surest ways to avoid conflict is to deflect incoming questions/accusations with jokes, self-flagellation, or exaggerated self-appreciation. While these tools may be effective in the short term - meaning they can deflect incoming hostility or unwanted attention - they lack the depth of character to lay the foundations for meaningful, lasting friendships. In other words, they’re a bridge to nowhere unless something of substance lies on the other side. 

I had a Christian upbringing and took the “turn the other cheek” to heart. I got the letter of the law but missed its spirit. I liked to treat others how I would like to be treated and naively assumed others would do the same. I had not yet come to appreciate how those attributes, while good in and of itself, it needed to be balanced by healthy boundaries. 
 
As a result, I am willing to concede things I want to make other people happy and help them get what they want, but not to do so at the sacrifice of my better judgment or self-respect. A willingness to put ourselves second works great in a relationship when both parties operate with the same understanding. 

However, when you are the only person surrendering and not setting boundaries for yourself, you appear weak and unreliable, a pushover. In a relationship, not having reasonable limits and the ability to say no is a death nail. As any girl reading this book can attest, they do not want a man who cannot stand up for himself. The world can be perilous, and a lady needs to know her man can take care of her when necessary. She wants to be confident that he can unleash the beast to provide and defend, consciously or subconsciously. When we don't establish well-communicated boundaries or stand up for ourselves, we create a cycle of resentment. It's a degrading, emotional spiral leading to a nasty, bitter end. So, putting others' needs ahead of your own is a good thing, but it can create problems like feeling off-balance and harboring bitterness.

Let's refer to my example in Chapter Two when I mentioned the man at Walgreens who wanted money from me and insisted I give him some, or he would put his dirty hands on my daughter's face. I ended up giving in to his demands to keep him from bothering me, and I was angry. As I mentioned, I did not give from a place of peace or love and instead passed on and took away anger and resentment. When I returned home, I put my daughter to bed and beat myself up about letting him take advantage of me. I repeatedly played out the scenario in my mind and realized it was part of a pattern of behavior where someone asked me to do something. 

I should have said no, but I did it anyway, then felt taken advantage of and ultimately unloved. I made a decision, then and there, to set boundaries. I would define them and then practice using them. I wished I could have started with the man in Walgreens, but I didn't know what I didn't know. I had the first opportunity to put my commitment to the test the following day when I was at Taco Bell. I was in line and suddenly looked out the window; the same man who had taken advantage of me the night before walked across the parking lot and into the store. I looked up at heaven and then back at the man as he walked straight toward me, passing the four or five people standing behind me in line. 
"I need a dolla, man. Do you have a dolla? I'm hungry." 
"You took advantage of me last night. When I was at Walgreens, you asked me for money, touched my daughter's face, and took five boxes of granola bars from me. I should have said no to you then, but I'm saying it to you now. “No. Absolutely not." 

What came next was a deluge of profanities and curses before he turned and walked out of the store in the same direction he had come. Everyone in the store stared at me, with what I had assumed would be judgment until several started clapping. I had just done it. I had set a boundary and protected my heart. I immediately felt empowered, like I had taken care of myself. And I got a small piece of the respect I had given away back. 

I began setting boundaries everywhere. I started saying 'no' more often, and when I said 'yes,' it was because I genuinely meant it. It was liberating. A considerable weight from years of others' expectations lifted off me.

Of course, there needs to be balance. I am speaking to guys like myself, who were more of a doormat (It hurts to admit that.), guys that tried so hard to make their girls happy, but seemingly, the more they tried to prove their love, the more they only pushed their partners away. I should have said no many times before. No, it's not okay for you to speak to me that way. No, I am not okay with you hitting me… ever. In any relationship, making the other person happy is not your job. That's their responsibility. You can contribute to their happiness, but the pleasure needs to come from inside of them. If we expect our spouses to make us happy, we set them up for failure. They will never be able to live up to the expectation. 
I've since remarried, and this was one of the first boundaries I set with my wife. It has been an essential foundation for our success. 

Now, you might be reading this and thinking that it has nothing to do with me, but I'd like to present the possibility that you are living on the other side of "boundary setting" and lacking those necessary to keep your emotions and fears in check. In a relationship, it's important to have boundaries and assert oneself; make sure you are not overemphasizing dominance or aggression because those conflicts and power struggles are terrible and lack emotional closeness. Healthy relationships require a balance of assertiveness and empathy. It's best when you can be savage when necessary, but you learn, in love, to turn those abilities toward your loved ones in service. We create a much stronger, safer, and more stable home. You are laying a firm foundation, built on something solid your whole family and community can benefit from and build on. 

If you lack boundaries with others, you must establish what they are and determine a good way to enforce them. If you lack internal boundaries, you need to decide what areas of your inner life are uncontrolled and spilling onto others and then develop a strategy to prevent it. It's empowering and exciting to start taking these steps, but here is a warning: the other people in your life might not appreciate your new boundaries and could leave. Embracing that possible eventuality is terrifying and the primary cause for why we don't set boundaries sooner. 


Losing the Relationship? No Thanks.

The real test of my new boundaries came when I first told my Ex, "No." I had already practiced my new boundaries with people at work, church, parents, and even God, but the most significant challenge was saying no to her. 

She had already left and divorced me and had taken one of our cars in the deal. She called me one day and told me the car needed an oil change, new brakes, and gas. My knee-jerk reaction was to want to help, but I stopped myself moments before I said, "Yes." 
"No." I hear the words escape my lips. There was a pause. 
"Excuse me? You have to do that."
"I don't. You left me, and I pay child support. You need to take care of that yourself." She was stunned, and so was I. She sputtered out a response. 
"I'll call my attorney…"
"Great. Do it. I'm not paying for it."
I hung up the phone before she could protest any further. I fell on the couch to catch my breath. My heart was pounding in my chest. Why? Why did I feel so flustered? Fear. The fear was the same as if I had been in a near collision. More specifically, it was the fear of losing someone that I love.

But she was already gone. Being "nice" and letting down my boundaries to accommodate her request so she wouldn't be angry or disappointed was no longer relevant in any capacity. I could say no, and the worst thing that could happen was she could call her attorney and have him tell me the same thing. I could say no to him, too! As I thought about that interaction, I began to see how I had allowed myself to be taken advantage of. And by allowing myself to be taken advantage of repeatedly, I lost my ex's respect. 

I don't know if she ever loved me, but she respected me. And once that was gone, there was nothing left. She could treat me however she wanted, and I would have done it to help make her happy. It's embarrassing for me to admit, but it is a fact. It was the cage I had built for myself. But, despite the horrific divorce and subsequent custody case, it had done me a favor. It had left the door to my emotional prison open, and now all I needed to do was to overcome my fear and choose to walk out. 

The outcome was astounding. As a result of my willingness to set boundaries, my Ex's tone toward me changed instantly. The next time we spoke, she asked me instead of telling me what to do. We began working together on some things instead of against each other on everything. She knew she needed me, and if Kinasha were going to get my help anymore, she would have to be more diplomatic and respectful of my boundaries. It will only sometimes work this way. The other person will likely become far more hostile to your new rules, but you will feel more in control of your life and choices. You can decide when you choose to contend or when you choose to withdraw. You can pick when you help and when you do not. 

When we are willing to let go of relationships with people who will not respect the emotional and physical boundaries we set, we will get a newfound sense of self-respect and control over our lives. We will be able to see who respects and loves us the way we are and whose acceptance of us is conditional. At times, our boundaries may stand in stark contrast to the limits set by others, and they may withdraw. 

We have to respect their boundaries and let them go. For example, I would like to spend more time alone to work on projects I have been putting off. The person I am with may want someone always available and around. When I express my new boundary, I may find it a deal breaker for them. To keep the boundary, I must be willing to let them go. It's a terrifying prospect, but do you want to be with people who do not respect or accept your boundaries? 


What Are Some Good Boundaries? 

How do I know if my boundaries are good? How do I know they are helping me and not hurting me? I know; I just spent the last few pages stating the importance of setting and keeping good boundaries by saying, "No." But good boundaries, like relationships, are fluid. They need to be flexible to maintain relationships. Good emotional borders acknowledge the limitations I have chosen to set for how I like to be engaged while, at the same time, leaving me the ability to decide when, where, and with whom I lower them. 

As someone who did not have or respect my boundaries, I needed to practice setting them up until I was satisfied with them. And until I was okay with the consequences of enforcing them. Yes, even if it meant losing a relationship. Once I was more in control of those limits, I was ready to benefit from their presence fully. 

Dr. Cloud and Dr. Townsend wrote a great example of this in their book. They stated, and I paraphrase, "When you have a house with a lawn, you know very clearly where the borders of your property are, so when someone walks onto your property without an invitation, you know it immediately, and you can welcome them onto your grounds, or you can threaten them to leave." They extend the metaphor to your car, "If you stop at a red light, and some rando opens the door and sits in the passenger seat uninvited, what do you do?" You tell them to get out, of course, and I'm sure you wouldn't do it nicely. However, you may decide to let them stay. You may find out where they are going. You may choose to take them to their destination, but you have the choice: Enforce the limits of your property and car, or relax the rules and let them in.  

Good boundaries are also emotional choices that lead to life. Whenever I hear a new idea or thought, I follow the thought to its most logical and probable conclusion. If that conclusion leaves a wake of broken homes, hurt people, fractured relationships, or devastation, I can logically reject the idea as “bad.” Similarly, I apply the title “good” to anything that improves the well-being of myself and others, such as anything pleasing, noble, excellent, or praiseworthy. Likewise, I consider anything that leads to loving relationships, peaceful homes, increased patience, tenderness toward others, faithfulness, and self-control as traits or attributes that create a more joyful existence. 

Here is an example of two choices: one that leads to life and one to death. The first pertained to something being taught to my daughter in school. Her teacher told the class that trans men who believe they are women are women and should be treated as such. I am all in favor of respecting and treating people with dignity. Still, I am entirely opposed to this logic and was disappointed it was being taught to my daughter in math class instead of math, but I can’t always be there to counter every thought or idea she is told, nor should I be. It is up to her to decide what is right and wrong for herself, but she needs the tools to do so. The conversation went as follows:
	“Let me guess. Your teacher also said that your parents would disagree with her or couldn’t understand because we are old-fashioned and grew up in a different period.”
	“Yes,” she replied. “Exactly.”
	“Well, then, let's follow her idea to a logical conclusion for how it can impact you as a woman, and you can tell me if the concept creates something that leads to life in you or death if it’s positive or negative.
	“Let’s take your soccer team, for example. What is the point of a soccer team? What do you want to do?”
“Win.”
“Right. And you’ve spent years training to play on the varsity team for your school, correct?”
“Yes.” 
“You’ve also scrimmaged against the boy's team.
“Yes.”
“How did that go?”
“We got crushed.”
“Now imagine how it would impact your team if one of those boys suddenly claimed he was a girl and was allowed to play on your team. Would he most likely take a starting position?”
“Yes.”
“Whose position?” She mentioned a weaker player.
“And if other schools started playing more boys claiming to be girls and most of their team was trans, would you be more likely to win or lose when you play against them?”
“Lose.”
“And if the goal of a team was to win and you kept losing to teams made up of boys believing they were girls, what would probably happen to your team?”
“They would look for trans boys to fill the team so we could win, which means girls wouldn’t play.”
“Does that benefit or hurt you and the girls on your team?”
“Hurts us.” 
“Does it lead to life or death?”
“Death.” 
“I lead you through this exercise, but try it out for yourself. Consider how your teacher's ideas will impact you if you follow them to their logical or most probable conclusion.”

The second scenario involved one of the hardest things I ever had to do. My wife had left and taken our daughter, and I did not know where they were going or with whom. That alone is devastating, but to top it off, when my daughter came back to me, she was so excited. She sang the praises of the “new” guy and how he had done all these amazing things for her. He had carved her a seat from a tree, given her ice cream, and taken her fishing. It was so much fun! Everything inside of me was on fire. I was furious. I wanted to choke the man. Carving chairs from trees and taking her fishing was my job, not his. 

Here I was, doing everything I could to save our family, and this guy was doing everything he could to ensure it was destroyed. I had several choices, life-and-death choices. I could have grilled her and pumped her for information about who he was. I could have justifiably yelled and screamed out loud. Instead, I chose to think about her. I forced myself to defend and protect her and minimize any damage our choices had on her (It’s impossible to protect them from everything). 
	“Aw. That’s wonderful. I’m glad you are safe and had such a great time. Did you catch anything?” I saw red, but I put a boundary between my daughter's and her parents' choices. I would not take my anger out on her, blame her for anything, or use her as a tool to get back at her mom. Another example of sticking to that boundary came one day when my daughter came to me crying. She was visibly distressed and feeling caught in the middle. 
	“What’s wrong?”
	“I don’t know. I don’t know who to believe.” She said through tears. 
	“About what?” 
	“Mom says you yelled at her, and you say you didn’t scream. I don’t know who to believe. Who is telling the truth? It was a horrible position to be in for both of us. 
	“Let me ask you something. Do I yell at you?”
“No.” She sniffled. 
“Do I yell at your grandparents or my sister?”
“No.”
“Do I yell at our cats?”
“No.”
“That’s because, as a rule, I don’t yell. If I did yell, there was probably a good reason. Like if you were running into the street and I yelled at you to stop. So don’t worry about who is right or wrong. Just watch me and judge me by my actions. If I tell you I don’t yell and yell at you all the time, then it doesn’t matter what I say; I’m a yeller. But If someone says I scream or I hit people, watch me. See how I behave. Then you will know what to believe.” 

Not every thought or idea you receive from others, no matter their status or degree, will be good for you. I include myself in this. As you read this book, ask yourself if these ideas will lead to a net positive result if you apply them. If you adopt most ideas that lead to death, your life will be marked by anxiety, imbalance, purposelessness, and loneliness. Some ideas can even lead to physical death if acted upon. 
	

Prioritize self-respect: Good boundaries should allow you to value and honor yourself. Do not tolerate disrespect, mistreatment, or abuse from your partner. Have a healthy regard for your values and integrity and demand healthy and respectful treatment. Likewise, do the same for others. As Jesus said, "Do unto others as you would have them do to you, for this sums up the law and the prophets." - (Matthew 7:12). That doesn't mean you have to be a doormat. It means you must honor and respect yourself enough to have good boundaries and love others enough to allow them to do the same.


How do I know when to relax my boundaries? 

There are certain boundaries I will never rest. For one, I will never let the person I am with scream at or publicly fight with me. It's a no-go for me. I will ask them to stop first; then I will tell them to stop; then, if they continue, I will walk away. If the pattern continues, I am willing to let that relationship go. I will not let someone speak to me with that level of disrespect. I won't tolerate cheating of any kind. Emotional or physical. If you don't want to be with me, then "bye." Let the door hit you on the way out. I will repeat myself here, but I will not allow my spouse or partner to expect me to be their source of happiness. These are a few of the boundaries I am unwilling to bend. Others I may be willing to turn depending on the person include things like. I don't want my sleep to be interrupted. It's important to me, and if I don't get a good night's sleep, I underperform when I am awake, making me feel lazy. However, if my wife wants to wake me up to let me know the house is on fire, I'm thrilled to relax my boundaries. 

There are two exercises I want to introduce to you if you need help with setting healthy boundaries. The first is a great exercise I found in a book by eHarmony founder Neil Clark Warren, "Date or Soulmate?". I've taught it to my daughter, who has often told me how helpful it is when considering a relationship with someone. While it is a book about dating and finding a soulmate, it applies very well when considering personal boundaries and is an excellent place to start if you need help knowing where to begin. 

The second exercise I developed is about discovering who you are and what makes you uniquely valuable. It's hard to see when you've been in an abusive relationship or abandoned. One night, I came up with it when my head was swimming with negative thoughts and drowning in unworthiness. We’ll talk about it in the next chapter! 


Food For Thought

We’ve talked a lot about setting good boundaries or making good choices. What are some good choices you have made that you are proud of? What are the negative ones? Is there anything you could do differently to set better expectations for yourself?
