






CHAPTER TWO
“YOU CHOSE HER”


“Don’t Blame Me, Mother, I’m just here for the Food.” - Jacqueline de Ghent, Ever After 

There’s Always Someone Else to Blame

Other people who aren't us, which happens to be everyone else, have their idea of happiness. The choices they make as they pursue what they believe will make them happy are factors we cannot often control. However, they are factors that can profoundly impact our lives nonetheless. For example, a man goes to a bar and gets hammered. He fights with his girlfriend, flips out, and, in sheer rage, speeds off in his car and drives straight into you while you are on your way home, ending your plans for the evening. Other people's decisions can drastically change your life plans. The drunken man's choice to drink and drive may have turned fatal. I’ve had to deal with that reality many times in my life. I lost great-grandparents, a best friend, and my college sweetheart to drunk drivers, all of which were out of my control and significantly impacted my life. 

After you leave your childhood home, everyone suddenly stops caring about what you want and says, "Welcome to life." For many of us, it's a rude awakening. Constantly getting smacked around by life can make us cynical, especially when the source of pain is the people we love the most. Falling into a cycle of despair is effortless, and there is an alluring temptation to remain there. While it may work for a turtle, it doesn’t serve us in the long run.

I thought my relationship with Kinasha would work out well. I believed we'd overcome our challenges, and in the end, we would live happily ever after. It worked out for some people, like my parents, but not for me, and reliving the painful fact dripped with self-pity over my raw emotions like a sweet honey salve. Up to that point, nothing in life had prepared me for this level of grief, and I wanted to run and hide, to wrap myself in a protective layer of delusion. Lies are often the medicine of choice. Vile little incantations intended to soothe, but they paved a pathway to despair instead: "I'm a failure." "She's right. I'm worthless." "I can't do anything right." "If I were a little smarter, richer, funnier, stronger, she wouldn't leave me." "I don't want to live anymore." "I can't live anymore." "No one can ever love me." 

Then, disgusted, I would withdraw from the pain that forced my mind back to the days before I was married. I was happy then, all on my own. I didn't need her to feel fulfilled. But then, just as quickly, those thoughts crumbled, and I was back into my cycle of self-hatred. At least these thoughts were genuine. I almost preferred those moments of pain to the illusions of hope I tried to paint for myself. I became increasingly lazy in my grief, and the couch kept calling me to come, forget responsibility, and leave the world for a while. 

I know this does not make me look good, and it’s about to get worse. But I needed to feel sorry for myself. I needed to be the victim to reconcile with the fact that I had been abandoned. I needed to convince myself when Kinasha told me on a cold night in North Carolina six years after we were married, “I don’t think I love you anymore.” there was nothing I could have done. Life wasn’t fair, and that was just it. I was a victim, put upon by life, and this was my fate. 

Of course, I didn’t stay in that miserable place. I picked myself up, did the work of moving forward, and found true freedom; when I chose, I would be the victor instead of the victim. There were two main catalysts. The first came from a young lady I started seeing several years after my divorce. She said, “Jason, you are leaning too much into the label of being divorced. You are allowing it to define you. You are not divorced. You were abandoned. It hit me hard. It was true. It was how I felt, the reality of what I was dealing with, and the first key to setting me free.

For me, being divorced was the label of a failure, and it came with all the stigma I felt of being a failed man. Until that moment, all my energy had been focused on that failure. Abandoned was something that had happened to me. It was something I could accept and control. At that moment, I decided to reject the arbitrary designation of Divorce, a label that left the power in someone else’s hands, and instead focus on healing from being abandoned. That was something I could understand and process. 


Overcoming the Victim Mentality 

If you're like me, you like to understand why things happen. What part of it is because of something I have done, and what can be done to correct what has happened, or at least prevent it from happening again? The adage by philosopher George Santayana is true. "Those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it." I prefer to say those who cannot learn from the past. It's semantics, yes, and essentially the same thing, except that one is thinking or dwelling on the lessons of yesterday, and the other is applying those lessons to the future. 

So, what lessons can be learned from going through a divorce? Everything! In the last chapter, I discussed how we go from broken to prospering and mentioned four things we have to do:

Establish a new identity apart from your relationship, 
Establish new goals, 
Think, plan, and focus on those goals to attract them. 
Take appropriate actions to align yourself with your goals and be ready for the opportunity. 

The first action involves establishing a new identity apart from your relationship. This comes by accepting the truth about your relationship and setting new emotional boundaries, and it will go a long way to help you overcome the victim mentality. 

For those of you who have a chance to save your marriage, it will start here, and for those whose relationships are beyond saving, it is an important stepping stone on your road to recovery. 

Here's your first lifeline. Admit that the relationship you envisioned for yourself is dead. The vow is broken, severed, and is NEVER EVER GOING BACK TO HOW IT WAS. I wanted to make sure you heard that. 

My dad first told me about this on one occasion. He pulled me aside and said. "Jason, you spend so much time dwelling on the past, and that past is gone. It doesn't exist anymore. You are grieving something that can never be again. I want to see you take that same energy you use to grieve your past and turn it toward the future."

He was right. I had spent the better part of two years trying to "save" what we had, trying desperately to get back to where we were, and as he said. That was not possible. I decided at that moment to turn my thoughts toward the future. Who was I, apart from my ex? What did I want to do with my life? I had a new start, a chance to do something differently. This mentality might redeem your current relationship, too. When you let go of what was and focus on what is next, who you are, and what you want to accomplish, you turn your energy from trying to revive a dead horse to birthing something new. 


Don’t Feed a Dead Horse

I was talking to a friend, we'll call him Chad, who had married a girl from overseas. Chad had spent the last three years of his life courting this girl, wooing her, and getting her here. He had spent all of his money to help her transition to the US legally and secure her place in his home as his wife. When she arrived, she found a very different story from what she had imagined America would be like. She immediately wanted to move closer to her family up North from Nashville, so he followed her there. 

They stayed with some family while my friend worked his butt off trying to provide. During the economic downturn, he struggled to get suitable employment and struggled with a sense of failure and insecurity. At this point, he called me one evening, broken and hurting. He explained that his new wife had told him that if he didn't get his act together, she wouldn't come back, and he informed me she had moved over an hour and a half away to stay with a family that she knew. He asked me what he should do. I took a moment to say a prayer before I answered, and what came out was as much a surprise to me as it was to him.

"It's over." It could have been more encouraging. I found myself wondering what would come next. He was silent. "It's over," I said again. "Look at you. You're working three jobs trying to pay the bills and traveling two hours weekly to visit her, and she's treating you with contempt. She doesn't respect you or how you are doing things right now. You are trying to please her; no matter what you do, you can never please her. You are trying to make her happy, and you can't. You can contribute to her happiness and do things that add joy to her life, but you can’t make her truly happy. It’s not your responsibility to make her happy because she doesn’t know herself what will make her happy. That’s her problem. And right now, she is showing you utter contempt because you cannot satisfy a need she can’t even define. Because of that, she doesn't respect you, and what's more, you are making it worse because you do not respect yourself. Every time she insults or leaves you, you try harder, work longer, and apologize more, when in reality, she is the one who should be apologizing."

I'm not hating on you, ladies. I love the women in my life and the richness they bring to it. At this moment, however, my friend needed to hear the hard truth. She loses respect for you when you allow her to treat you this way. A girl needs a man to be strong, not a chest-thumping Neanderthal, though some of you might like that, a man who can stand firmly for what he believes and defend himself and his family, and knows how her respect for him is a direct reflection of his respect for himself. A man has to have boundaries, and she has to know where they are.

 Chad was listening. 

"If you let her push you around, she feels, consciously or subconsciously, doubt. How can you protect her from others if you can’t even protect yourself from her?” I wasn't telling him anything that every twelve-step program hasn't already said a million times before. You have to accept the truth of where you are to begin the recovery journey. Acknowledging the relationship is over in his case, and mine, set our minds free to begin healing.

A manly expression of sorrow and tears followed a pause. I could hear the heaviness in my friend's voice. I knew the feeling; I could understand the burden because I had been there. 

"How do I do that?" 

It's probably the same question you’re asking yourself. I certainly did, and it took me a lot of pain and frustration to figure it out. The first step to healing and possibly saving a relationship is not compromising your own worth and value. Being rejected doesn’t make you a failure in life, just possibly in this situation. Just because you’re not a mechanic doesn’t mean you can’t win a NASCAR race. 

A father is most proud when his kids get up and run after a fall. The same is true, I suspect, of your Father in heaven. To Him, you are a one-of-a-kind individual made in His image. And you are here for a reason. The God who created the entire universe found you valuable enough to take the time to make you - and not just a physical avatar or NPC, but an eternal soul. You live! It was not a mistake. You have a purpose and a destiny. You may not see it during your present suffering. Still, if you lean into the truth - that you are valuable and that this is not all there is - it will give you a good starting point for what follows—discovering your purpose and setting boundaries that support your goal. 


Something New - Purpose

The second action required in establishing a new identity apart from your relationship is discovering a new purpose.
Incredible power is found in a life led and energized by a purpose. It releases an energy that forces you to get out of bed and face the day's challenges. And yes, while it is tough to discover or even care about finding purpose when you don't care about anything, I cannot stress enough the importance of finding one, even if it is temporary and only something that helps push you through the garbage you are going through. A seed won’t see the sun until it breaks through the manure.

I teach from time to time at the New York Film Academy Los Angeles Campus. I teach their BFA, MFA, and summer directing programs, and the very first question I ask my students is, "What is your purpose?". I don't mean why they are there at school. That is easy. Why do they exist? What is their reason for being? I ask them this because every decision they make in their lives, relationships, and filmmaking has its roots in the answer to these questions. 

To prove my point, a young atheist in my class said, "Why would you ask that question? I'm an Atheist and don't believe life has a purpose." The conversation went as follows:
"I'm not judging you. Not at all. I'm pointing out how the answer to this question determines everything you do. Let me show you. I assume you have a film you are working on this semester."
"Yes." She replied.
"Is it about a boy? Girl? 
"A girl." 
"Okay, great. Let me guess. Your story is about a girl trying to find her… purpose." The rest of the class helped me answer. She was surprised at my response and laughed. 
"Yes!"
"Do you think anyone in the world can relate to your story?" 
She nodded. 
I pressed on. "Are there any other atheists in here?" About three or four more hands went up. "Can you relate to her story?"
They all nodded vigorously. They were in the same place and were similarly affected by their understanding of purpose.
Whether conscious of the fact or not, her understanding of her place and purpose in life informed her character and story and set her hero on a quest to discover meaning. 

What a great place to start! 

The lesson here is we will be led or guided by what we consciously or unconsciously acknowledge or deny about our purpose. And like our atheist friend here, we will, generally speaking, during abandonment and divorce especially, default to the "I don't know, or I don't care" setting. This is okay for a very short time but will prevent you from healing and moving forward significantly in the long run. 

Here are a few questions you can answer to help you discover your purpose. We will discuss it further in the next chapter. 

What do I value most in life? Honesty? Hard Work? Friends? Loyalty? Marriage? 

What do I enjoy? What usually makes me happy?

Who Am I? What is my identity apart from my relationship?

What is my eternal perspective? What happens after I die? 

Once established, it will be time to create emotional boundaries that allow you to respect and maintain your new identity. 



Boundaries

I first heard about setting boundaries when talking with my friend and family counselor, Dr. Bethany Haley. She had already been familiar with my case since my ex and I had visited her several times while trying to work things out. But after it became clear Kinasha would not return, Bethany told me I should snag the book Boundaries by Dr. Henry Cloud and Dr. John Townsend. If you've already read this book, you’re nodding because you know just how right the stuff is. It was amazing to me and inspired one of those moments where you smack yourself upside the head and say, "Why didn't I get this stuff before?" 

Learning about boundaries was one of the most profound steps on my healing journey. I had a hard time saying "no" to people and said "yes" more than I should have because I wanted to ensure I was being nice and not hurting someone's feelings. That’s what I told myself. To be honest, I wanted them to like me. I’ve always been diplomatic, but it never really worked in my favor until I learned how to say no. Until then, because I had no boundaries, I didn't know where I began and ended, leaving me open to abuse and being taken advantage of. 

The first significant revelation came late one night at the hands of a homeless man while my daughter was with me for the weekend. It was well after midnight, and she had wet her diaper. I flicked the light to her small bedroom, scooped her up, and laid her on the changing table. Reaching blindly for the diapers, I grabbed the bottom of the bag… empty. She had done a number on this diaper, filled it well past the fifteen-pound recommended capacity, and even managed to spill some onto her bed. 

I had a wet child, a wet bed, and no diapers. Thankfully, Walgreens was a stone's throw from my house, so I wrapped my two-year-old daughter in clean pajamas and headed to our friendly 24-hour drugstore. I quickly found the diapers and left the store carrying my daughter, the diapers, and several rolls of paper towels. I would need to clean up everything. On my way out, a homeless guy walked right up to me.
"Hey, man. You got ten dollas? I need a bus ride. Just a quick bus ride… What a cute kid. What's her name?" (Insert dirty hands in the child's face.)
"Hey there, little one… I need some money, man. I'm hungry." (Insert more hands in baby's face). I was in shock, spinning in circles to keep him from touching my now-crying daughter.
"Fine. OK, I'll get you some food. Just let me put my things in the car and…."
"Great, I'll go inside and pick something." Now, at this point, I should have just left. It would have been a perfect getaway. But I told someone I would do something and had to do it. Call me old fashion. I chucked the diapers in the car and carried my daughter back inside. I thought I was already pissed until I went inside, and the man was standing at the cash register, ringing up six boxes of granola bars at over five dollars each.

"He's paying for these." The man said, pointing in my direction as the cashier tossed me an indifferent gaze.
"No, I'm not. I'm not buying you five boxes of granola bars!"
"Come on, man! I'm hungry. Just three boxes."
"I'll buy you one. One box." 
"Man, you're cheap." He scolded me.
"Do you want something to drink?" Why did I ask that? Idiot. Most of you would have thrown the boxes in his face.
"No man, I'll just take two boxes…. What a cute little baby." He was already reaching for her face again. 
"Fine. Two boxes." As I was paying, the man left without even saying thank you. I felt like such a fool. I was furious, and then it hit me. You can call it your inner voice, whatever you like, but I felt that Spirit inside me say, "Why did you do that?"
"I was helping that man."
"No, you weren't. How do you feel right now?" I was angry, extremely angry, and tired.
"You didn't help that man. You didn't give out of love or a joyful heart. Instead, you gave out of anger, and you passed that anger onto him." 

At that moment, I realized that when I do anything for someone out of guilt and anger, even fear when I think I'm doing good, but everything inside of me says no, I am violating myself and crushing my boundaries. I have not created a place where I am safe and loved in my mind, a place of wholeness out of which I can give in abundance.

I am ready to give when I respect my boundaries and have a willing heart. I'm prepared to love. Saying no to that man violating my limitations would have made him mad, but it would have kept me from growing angry and doing something I knew wasn't good. 

I was enabling his bad behavior, as he needed me to say no as much as I needed to say no. Sometimes, people we love need to hear the word no, even if it upsets them. I needed to say no. No, it's not OK with me that you are leaving for the night and not telling me where you are going. No, it's not OK that you disappeared for three hours, and now you are calling me controlling for wanting to know where you are at midnight on Tuesday with our 1-year-old child. No, I don't appreciate you speaking to me like that in front of our friends. No, I will not watch our daughter while you spend time with a male co-worker at a concert.

Some of you don't have this problem, and I'm thankful for that; maybe you are even a little far the other way and need to extend some grace, but I'm speaking to those of us who are weak in this area. We find ourselves constantly trying to please other people, and we believe that we are doing what's right in this; we are "saving" the relationship, but what we are doing is denying our value and not loving ourselves.

I'll give you this little test to see if you need to set better boundaries for yourself. Imagine if someone treated your children, your best friend, your parents, and even your dog the way you are treated. What would you do? What would you tell them? Would you stand up for them or allow them to continue hurting the people you love? No way! 

Sometimes, we allow people to do far more hurtful things to us than we would ever let them do to the ones we love. Something inside us must keep telling us that we don't deserve better than that. It's not OK for other people to be continually abused, but we keep making up excuses for the ones that hurt us, and then our crazy brains find a way of convincing us that what’s happening to us is somehow our fault. Maybe a bit of it is our fault, but all of it? 

I'm pointing my finger at fear. Fear of losing the relationships we care about and being alone keeps us from standing up for ourselves in the face of pain and even abuse. My friend was afraid his wife would leave for good. So he worked harder, apologized for every slight infraction, and attempted to prevent her anger by becoming increasingly compliant with her whimsical desires.

After my wife declared that she no longer loved me, I was afraid she’d leave. I worked hard to be more sociable, funnier, and more sensitive. Ultimately, it didn't work for me, and she left anyway—in fact, maybe that’s a big part of why she left. All I had to show for my groveling was a broken home and a sharp sense of worthlessness.

A verse in the Bible says, "Love your neighbor as you love yourself." The implication is that you must love others the same way you love yourself. You will treat others with the same love and respect you tender yourself. But to love others the way we love ourselves, we must first love ourselves. 

What if you don't love yourself? What if you can't forgive yourself? If these questions keep popping up, you must return to your purpose and redefine it until it is solidly cemented in your mind. By re-establishing or establishing a sense and living in it daily, you’ll begin to respect yourself and be more able to forgive yourself, too. 

Failure to set boundaries demonstrates that you don’t love yourself enough to prevent the bleeding or to stop it once it starts. It might have turned out differently if I had recognized that I was being violated as a person and learned to set healthy boundaries earlier. 

Continuing my conversation with my friend earlier in the chapter, I told him, "You need to realize that you don’t deserve to be left. You haven’t done anything that you deserved to be abandoned for. If I thought you had done something, I’d tell you. Your wife isn’t taking any responsibility for the relationship. She's moved away and is waiting for you to fix everything, meaning you are giving her everything she wants, even if she doesn’t know what that is, which is not OK. That’s not how successful relationships work. She needs to be down on her hands and knees with you, digging and working the field beside you so that when your relationship flourishes, it is because you were both working together.”

He was able to accept the reality of his relationship as the reality of his situation and begin to set good boundaries. Thus, he demonstrated self-respect, and as it grew, so, too, did his wife’s respect for him. He rebuilt his relationship with his wife on a healthier foundation. In addition, he let his wife know what his boundaries were, what the consequences would be if she did not respect them, and that running away was not an option. At the same time - while acknowledging her frustration and expressing his love and desire for her - he let her know that they’d have to work together to find happiness - for both of them. 

Today, almost fifteen years later, they are together and doing well. It worked for them for two reasons. First, she still loved him and was willing to work, and second, he overcame his fear of losing the relationship and stood up for himself. That let her know he would stand up for her, as well.

Food For Thought:

I was abused. I was hurt and let myself continue being hurt when I deserved so much more. It was hard to look past my pain and wallowing in the pain was easier than accepting responsibility for my own future happiness. 

When I was fortunate enough to meet my wife Rei, she said something that has stuck with me ever since. One night, I was grieving over a past pain, and she pointed out that I was stuck in a victim mentality. I quickly retorted she didn't understand my pain or experience. 
"I didn't choose to be abandoned. I didn't choose to be divorced and my child and everything I owned!”
To which she replied. "Maybe not, but you chose her. And since you chose instead of blaming her, you should be asking yourself. Why did you choose her in the first place? What made you ignore all the red flags and jump into that marriage?" 
It stung and hung in the air while the weight of her words worked through my thick skull into my heart. "If you continue to blame her for everything that has happened to you, then you never gain the power you need to change where you go from here. Accept responsibility for what happened and work to see it doesn't happen again." 

Ask these questions and write down the top ten things to get you started: What are you okay with? What are you not okay with? How many of your wounds are self-inflicted?























