
CHAPTER FOUR
“TO DREAM OR NOT TO DREAM?”


"Dreams are like stars... You may never touch them, but if you follow them, they will lead you to your destiny." - Liam Payne?

It is essential to understand the power of our dreams and the place they play in our lives. You may already be a big dreamer, and your dreams got in the way of your marriage, or maybe you've been burned too many times pursuing your goals, and it hasn't been worth the cost. Perhaps you've abandoned your dreams so long ago that you completely forgot what they were and stopped caring. Regardless of where you are on the spectrum, understanding your objectives, grounding them in your values and purpose, and getting them to serve you instead of vice versa is paramount to success. Taking control of them now is as good a time as any, regardless of your previous record.  And let's talk about timing – when life throws you a curveball, like during times of brokenness, that's the perfect moment to examine how our dreams are working for us or against us. Your dreams should be your allies, not your adversaries. Let's take a look at how we can harness their power, align them with your values, and watch them become the fuel that propels you toward success.


Dream the Impossible Dream - What are your dreams, and what are you willing to do to achieve them?

I love the movie Stardust. It's one of my top ten favorite films. I enjoy fantasy, and nothing beats a good underdog story. Plus, it's a beautiful romance. Occasionally, I'm a sucker for a good love story, especially when it involves swords… Here's a warning for slight spoilers if you haven't seen it yet. 

 Tristan is a young man from a small town who is head over heels in love with a girl who isn't all that into him, but it doesn't stop him from trying to woo her. During one of his attempts, a shooting star flies past, and the young woman tells him that if he loves her, he will follow the star and bring it back to her. She is confident she has sent him on a fool's quest and impossible errand. But Tristan embarks on the journey anyway. Leaving the safety of his small village, he crosses the forbidden barrier into the unknown to bring back the star. Nothing will stand in the way of his love, no matter what it might cost him. It's an incredible metaphor for this book and our story. (The first lesson I will point out is to be wary of people who expect you to earn their affection. It's possible to do, but more often than not, it ends up with a goal post that is constantly moving and both people perpetually frustrated.)

Once Tristan crosses the magical barrier into the world beyond, he is immediately confronted with a new reality. Nothing was the way he thought it was before. Tristan was not a poor farmer from the village of Wall but someone much more remarkable. He never would have known this if he had not followed his dream to get the star to get the girl. He would have stayed where he was. I won't ruin the rest of the story if you haven't seen it yet. But suffice it to say, he is in for quite a surprise when he finds the star. The point I will take from this story is the actual value of the dream. 


While purpose is a grounding force, dreams are compelling, pushing you to the next chapter of life.

Outside the window at the New York Film Academy in Los Angeles is the Hollywood Hills and the backside of the Hollywood Sign. At the top of the hill, there is a tree called the Wisdom Tree. And at the base of the tree is a little box where people put encouraging words or sayings. I asked my students one brutal summer day. 
"It's 110 Degrees right now. Who wants to hike to the wisdom tree? No hands went up. "What if I told you there were a million dollars up there, and whoever gets there first can have it? Who wants to go?" Every hand went up. You see, the dream has to be strong enough to dislodge you from where you are to get you motivated enough to risk hardship, ridicule, and potential failure that often accompanies any task worth pursuing. Dreams are intended to get you to leave the safety and comfort of where you are and risk becoming a better version of yourself along the way, or as Liam put it in the quote at the beginning of this chapter, "They lead you to your destiny," even if you don't achieve them. 

Tristan's daring journey to retrieve the fallen star echoes the profound impact that following one's dreams can have on shaping new perspectives and revealing unexpected realities. And, just as Tristan ventured beyond his familiar village, we need to step outside our comfort zones to pursue our aspirations. This notion is vividly illustrated by the lesson I taught my class involving the Wisdom Tree. The tree serves as a symbolic reminder that dreams must be compelling enough to prompt us to overcome hardships and uncertainties, much like Tristan's quest to win the heart of his beloved. 

While dreams are wonderful inward expressions of a personal manifesto, they are meaningless unless coupled with action, and they also come with a caveat: a warning. Dreams are double-edged swords; you must learn to control your dreams, or your dreams will direct you. 

I asked my class a follow-up question. "Who in here wants to get an Oscar?" Every hand in class went up. "Awesome, that's the dream, right? To get an Oscar. And now that you have one, is that it? You don't need anything ever again? You can set up a hammock, sip margaritas, and watch the sunset until you die?" They shook their heads. "Now that you have one Oscar, what do you want?" 
"Another Oscar." They were right. I won an Emmy, and it was exhilarating the day I won and thrilling a couple of nights afterward, but after a few weeks, I started thinking about what was next. 

In Hollywood, they have a terrible saying, "You're only as good as your next project." That's the other side of the sword. You will be sorely disappointed if you expect the dream to satisfy you, especially if you are looking for the approval of others and you fail to live up to their expectations. And even though you have achieved the dream, it is not enough to satisfy a world forever in forward motion, charging toward some unseen cliff. Unless you are aware of the flow and the direction you are headed, you are doomed to follow the other lemmings off of the cliff.

As you may have seen, the real value and irony of the Wisdom Tree story is the contrast between seeking immediate monetary gain or fame and the more profound importance of wisdom and self-improvement. If the goal is to be famous or rich, we doom ourselves to a life of unfulfilled expectations because what is ever renowned enough? What is ever rich enough? I'm not knocking being rich or famous; they are powerful tools to achieve your dreams. However, if you acknowledge the purpose of the dream is the journey itself and the lessons you learn along the way, you will be able to see the initial goal you had was only preparing you to be the person you needed to be to embark on the next part of your story. And each subsequent journey leads you to the ultimate goal… your destiny. The reason you are here—your purpose. 

These stories expose the challenge of steering motivation towards intrinsic rewards, the eternal perspective, rather than solely focusing on external factors. This is the dual nature of dreams and the significance of adequately motivating them. For each step you take, each lesson you learn, it's all part of the big picture. And guess what? That big picture is your destiny, your purpose in this wild world.


What Does That Have to Do With My Marriage?

Let's relate this to your relationship with your spouse or Ex. If you are like me, I'm sure you entered the relationship believing or at least hoping it would work, that your relationship would be joy-filled and fulfilling. You envisioned yourself creating a life with her, raising kids, traveling the world, and sharing life. That was your worldview and your dream. However, it took a wrong turn, and everything you planned and hoped for was gone. Perhaps it was something you had done; you were unfaithful or an addict. Maybe it was no fault of yours, and your wife was expecting you to make her happy, and you couldn't. Whatever the reason, the tear of a severed relationship creates a hole in the middle of your chest, and, much like a vacuum, everything will rush in to fill it: anger, bitterness, revenge, apathy, alcohol, women, despair. And you will have to fight to keep the wrong ones out and let the right ones in. A positive, powerful dream that aims to give personal growth and purpose will help you get unstuck and pull you past the pain so you can begin to make more grounded and less emotional choices. 

In the beginning of the end, different emotions will compete to dominate your mind and control your heart. But gradually, those emotions will give way to new thoughts, leading to unique desires, and those desires will lead to new goals. For some of you, it may be a burning desire to destroy your ex and punish her regardless of the cost. For others, find an amicable way to work together for the children's sake. Some may be excited by their newfound freedom and engage as many other women as possible. Unfortunately, not many take the time to pause and reflect. "Who do I want to be now?” “What do I want to get out of life now?" or "What is the long-term consequence of the choices I am making now?" Generally, when we're in pain, we want it to stop and don't care what that something is as long as it works, even if it is detrimental in the long run.

So, how is this helpful? For those in control of our dreams and destinies, the disaster we are experiencing can become our most extraordinary possibility. We can replace the first good dream with another equally beneficial one; if we have learned from our circumstances, it could be even better! 

We can start with the person we were before, combine them with the lessons we learned through the struggle, and point them laser-focused toward a brighter future. We commit now to learn from our mistakes and see that we do not repeat them. We dedicate ourselves to giving our children the best chance of success during a horrific situation and work to bring peace into the middle of chaos. 

There are other ways our dreams can control us, and if we are not careful, if we are not aware of their power, they may end everything else we care about. They may be the reason our relationships are falling apart as we speak. Are you staying at work later and later? Have you been neglecting time with the kids and your wife in exchange for "success," the next rung on the ladder, the next opportunity? How much of our lives are spent sacrificing family time and meaningful moments to pursue the next shiny opportunity? As we move forward in this chapter, we will learn to find a new purpose and dream, weigh the costs and the rewards of those goals, and learn how to use those tools to serve you and not the other way around. When you master this concept, you will step from merely surviving into the realm of thriving, and the only legitimate limit is your imagination. 


You’re A Dream Chasing Hero

Contrary to common belief, mastering your dreams involves letting go of them to thrive through you. Better said, it means letting go of our attachment to them. This includes preconceived expectations of how they should unfold. Rarely, if ever, do our dreams turn out the way we think they will, and we can be exceedingly grateful for that. More often than not, our ideas of what we believe is best, even in our most idyllic of imaginings, pail in comparison to what we receive when we let go of the outcome. By letting go of expectations, we create space for dreams to flourish organically.

As I've mentioned previously. I've spent a significant amount of time overseas. On one such trip to Uganda, I had the privilege of meeting and working with Katie Davis, the author of Kisses From Katie. For those of you who don't know this dynamite firecracker of a soul, you need to! She was an incredible student, top of her class, homecoming queen, and class president, and had a ticket to just about any school she could ever desire. 

By all accounts, she had the hallmarks of "success" written all over her. But, as she puts it, "She loved Jesus." It was her love for Him and the call on her heart that she ended up in Jinja, Uganda; I met her in a small compound at just twenty-two and the mother of fourteen girls. Yes, you read that right, fourteen. 

When she first arrived in Uganda, she saw a terrific need. Hundreds of children were without food, clothes, shoes, or the ability to get an education. Many didn't even have parents, as HIV or Malaria had killed most. One night, a fierce storm raged with thunder and lightning. Kate received a caller who told her of a young nine-year-old girl whose mud house had collapsed on her. The young child was the sole caretaker of her two younger siblings. Katie went to the hospital and found the girl lying in a bed, untreated. She demanded to know why the girl was lying in pain with no one to help her. In Uganda, no one receives service if no one pays the bill. Katie agreed to pay for the girl, got the little girl's sisters, and brought them to her house for lunch. Lunch turned into dinner, and dinner into a sleepover. She then looked for relatives in the entire region who could care for the children but could find no one. 

While searching for a new home for the girls, they became more and more like a family until one day, Katie had the crazy and daunting idea that she needed to adopt them. What made matters even more challenging was a Ugandan policy that forbids anyone who adopts children from leaving the country with them. Her one-year commitment was quickly going to change into a lifetime commitment. A few months later, she became the mommy of another two beautiful girls. 

The number grew and grew; by the time I finally met her family, there were fourteen girls. In addition, she was responsible for feeding, educating, and dressing over 800 kids from the surrounding area. It was incredible hearing her story and spending time with her family. The following day, the group I had traveled with washed around six hundred children's feet and gave them new shoes, then proceeded to help her feed the village of children who relied on her. 

I asked her how she did it. How did she stay in an area where no other people like her? She had left her family, her culture, and even her boyfriend. She told me it was for love. The love she had for God and the love she had for the Ugandan people. 

Her dream to make a difference had pulled her from the safety and comfort of where she lived in Tennessee and brought her to the other side of the world, where she was changing everything. It was such an inspiration and left me breathless and humbled. She dreamed of making a difference in Uganda for a year, but her willingness to let go of the mission's results and embrace whatever God had in store blessed her beyond imagination. In her book, she eloquently said, "I was ruined for comfort, convenience, and luxury, preferring instead challenge, sacrifice, and risking everything to do something I believed in." That's the power of a dream. With it, you can overcome anything if it doesn't kill you. 

She wasn't the only dream-chasing hero I met on that trip. After Uganda, I traveled to Ethiopia and spent time in Addis Ababa. The city is very dusty, which leads to incredible sunsets, but covers everything in a fine layer of soot, making one feel perpetually dirty. On the outskirts of the city was the city landfill. It was vast and more of an entire region than an area. 

We arrived to see the children living there at Christmas time and gave them their first Christmas. Imagine with me, if you will, an entire city with four and five-story buildings. Now turn those buildings into stinking, smoldering trash heaps. Then, put stagnant water at the bottom of every pile and add pigs and children. It is among the worst living conditions on the planet. 

We brought a goat, and they killed and cooked it right there. (Thank the Lord I didn't have to eat that. It was everything I could do to keep from expelling breakfast.) Then we gave them presents and hugs! That was the first time an adult had ever loved on a number of them. One of the young men who led us there, Joseph, had grown up in the dump with no hope of leaving. Like other children of Ethiopia born into a quasi-class system, they cannot escape unless an outsider sponsors them to do so. 

Joseph was bright, hard-working, and attentive. He also had a dream. Despite the fact his family and community lived in and around the dump, they could not drive the trucks that dropped mountains of trash off every day because they could not afford to get the licenses, and because they could not get a permit, they could not get enough money to change their lives. Joseph wanted to go to college to learn how to run a business, and then he proposed to create a plan for the dump to raise money to help get the men living near the landfill a license to change the lives of the people where he grew up forever. Little did he know how successful he would become. 

He became the first person to graduate high school from the dump, the first person to graduate college, and the first person to get a master's degree in business. Instead of leaving and making a career for himself, he returned to the dump, bought hundreds of licenses for the people living there, and, through his constant petitioning, drew international attention to the conditions of his people. The attention led to the government bulldozing the entire area and moving everyone out and into better accommodations. If you take nothing else from Joseph's story, I want you to know that your life has power, meaning, and purpose. 

Even now, you can start from your devastated and broken state and choose to do something different. It doesn't have to be moving to the other side of the world, but it should involve something outside of yourself that makes a difference to others, which will spill over into being a blessing for you, too. 

Why do I care so much about you connecting with your dream? Katie summed it up so well when she said, "The answer is simple. "Because the Lord who created you loves you. Because He created you for a purpose, and He wants you to fulfill that purpose. Because the God who knows every hair on your head wants to lift you out of this dust and into His glory!" There is more to do, no matter what you have lost. 


The Dream Giver 

As we've seen in previous examples, chasing our dreams demands courage, persistence, and the readiness to step out of our comfort zones. Sometimes, our comfort zone is familiar with despair, which can hold us back. 

To break free, we need something strong enough to get us unstuck. To comprehend the power of purpose, we must explore the origin and strength of our dreams. Where do the visions come from, and what makes them so powerful? 

Color is lovely if you can see it; music is beautiful if you can hear the symphony. Many of life's most profound experiences are rooted in our senses, experiences that we may approach differently based on our unique perspectives. In much the same way, we have a spirit and a soul designed to allow us to experience multiple dimensions. We can project ourselves into the future, imagine what our choices today will do, and then adjust our present decisions and actions to increase our chances of a desirable outcome. It's what the book aims to help you explore.

Let's take this thought deeper. Like a computer program, our spirits search our hearts and souls for meaning and purpose, develop our beliefs, and navigate the challenges and successes of life. And that computer-like program, or our spiritual, inner selves, instead of being connected to the Internet or a hard drive, is connected to the divine—our connection to the sacred, if you will, and enables us to derive purpose and meaning from something greater than ourselves. 

The book of Genesis records that God created man in His image and likeness, and as an intelligent creator, He put the spark of creativity in each of us. Some of you may be saying you do not believe in God, or there is no creator; that is a matter for another book, but for now, suffice it to say that much of modern science in all significant fields is continuously running into the challenge of explaining the fine-tuning of the universe and the evidence of intelligent design. The fine-tuning of the universe refers to the remarkable and precise balance of physical constants, fundamental forces, and initial cosmic conditions. It is the idea that the universe's properties appear to be finely tuned to allow for the existence of complex structures like stars, galaxies, and life. In fact, without intelligent design, we wouldn't even be able to question our existence or explain the purpose of our values and dreams in the first place. It is essential for a more extraordinary being or force to exist to liberate us from impossible situations: Deus Kinasha  Machina, terrible storytelling, fantastic when it happens to you. And, whether faith in God is genuine or perceived, it has been a powerful enough belief to rescue millions of people from their darkest hours for generations. 

Overcoming the challenges we face in life, like divorce or the death of a loved one, requires a mighty and constant force outside of us. The power must be unchanging and eternally reliable. We need to be able to tap into the divine and use it to pull us through the mud and out the other side. Sometimes, that can be music, a good book, or a powerfully spoken word, but those are rarely strong enough to do the trick. Usually, any value these creative artistic endeavors offer comes through the points where they touch the divine. 

As a final challenge to those who would say there is no God and we are the byproducts of chance and evolution, how does it work? How has the name of Jesus been strong enough to break addictions, heal broken hearts, and cleanse sickness? If it has all been in mind, how has it been compellingly sufficient for over two thousand years by billions of people to find hope? It is grounded in something ancient, deep, and eternal. Whether you believe it or not, it works, and we will use it. For the sake of this book and our journey to find healing, we will open ourselves to accepting we can find worth from someone outside of ourselves, and we can use our "Spirit sense" to hear from the divine and to help us lay a robust foundation for healing. 

I recall one night before Kinasha had "officially" left, and she had told me to take our daughter to visit my family in Indiana for Thanksgiving. We spent a delightful long weekend feasting and celebrating, and when we returned, I dropped our daughter off with her mom. I got back home on cloud nine. It was the happiest I'd been in some time, but the excitement was short-lived. When I raced upstairs and headed to my bedroom, I came to a screeching halt outside my daughter's little bedroom. It was empty. Her things and everything that had belonged to Kinasha were gone. My knees buckled, and I crumpled to the ground. My heart gave out, and I was reeling from grief and pain. I started weeping, and suddenly, I heard a small voice in my spirit saying, "Thank me for this." 
"I'm sorry. Thank you for this!"
The prompt came again. "Thank me for this." 
"Okay," I said. "Thank you for this pain. Thank you for this suffering." Unexpectedly, it felt like someone began to pour warm water all over my body. From the top of my head to the bottom of my feet, I felt a rush of power and peace. 
"This is my Holy Spirit, my Comforter. It's a part of me you've never known before because you've never had to suffer like this. I am here. I am in this. And I am bringing redemption. I wept and wept until I couldn't cry anymore, but what I had, which I was lacking before, was hope. I didn't know the outcome but knew God would redeem my story. It was like a giant weight had lifted off my chest, and a confident hope for the future replaced it. 
	
I needed that. I needed to know I was not alone, someone had my back, and my life wouldn't be as it was forever. From that moment on, I began to look for new ways to move forward. I told myself, since I am so broken, let's work on me. Let's work on the parts of me I can only access in brokenness. I didn't ever want to break like this again. So I did. I started by taking inventory of the things in my life that were holding me back. The things I believed in that were false concepts of myself and my relationships. I broke through some past trauma I had forgotten and learned to set boundaries and forgive myself. These lessons empowered me to pick up my dreams, dust them off, and use them to propel me forward. 


Food For Thought:

Whether you're a big dreamer like me or have abandoned your dreams, it's crucial to understand how to harness their power and align them with your values. Timing, especially during challenging times, can be pivotal in evaluating whether your dreams work for or against you. Those incredible dreams should be your allies, not adversaries. How have your goals helped you in the past, and how do you see them helping you going forward? 

Dreams serve as a compelling force, motivating us to leave our comfort zones and work towards becoming better versions of ourselves. However, we've also learned that dreams can be double-edged swords. Achieving a dream may not provide lasting satisfaction, especially if we seek external validation or constantly chase new goals. Do you control your dreams, or are your dreams holding you?

As we reflect on the stories of individuals like Katie Davis and Joseph, we underscore the power of dreams to drive positive change, even in the face of immense challenges. Their willingness to let go of attachment to outcomes allowed them to make a significant impact on the lives of others. Do everything you can do today to work toward your goals. You might not have the energy for much but don't sweat it. Every little bit helps. Once you have done everything you can today, let go of the results. 

We've discovered that dreams have a spiritual dimension, connecting us to something greater than ourselves, whether we attribute it to a higher power or simply the human spirit. This connection can provide the strength to overcome adversity and find purpose in our suffering.

Remember the transformative power of gratitude and embrace your pain as a catalyst for personal growth. By understanding and healing ourselves, we can rekindle our dreams and use them as a driving force to move forward.

In the end, your dreams have the potential to lead you to your destiny and fulfill your purpose. By recognizing their significance, aligning them with your values, and learning to let go of preconceived expectations, you can become a dream-chasing hero in your own life and find healing simultaneously.















