



CHAPTER EIGHT
ATTRACTION AND ALIGNMENT 

“To the degree that people understand new strategies, their ability to make their own life better grows exponentially. To the degree that people understand the forces already influencing their behavior, they are more empowered to choose their response”  - Influencer: The Power to Change Anything. 

We have an incredible opportunity in this life to change our thoughts. We can change how we see the world and our responses to it. Which means we don’t have to be stuck. And when we are stuck, we can get unstuck by learning new strategies that help us turn our lives around. Once we can see the thoughts and ideas holding us captive, we become “more empowered to choose” our response. 

I’ve mentioned this in previous chapters and demonstrated the idea with the equation I taught my daughter. What happened to you (the forces that are already influencing you) + What you can do (the choices and strategies you can employ) = What you want to achieve (your goals). But we will take it a step further in this chapter. We will transcend how we have been thinking and open our minds to new ways of viewing ourselves and the world. When we open our minds and focus our energy on a goal, we begin to attract the tools and people we need to achieve it. 


The Law of Attraction

This focused open-mindedness is often referred to as the Law of Attraction and, distilled to its most basic description, revolves around determining what you want from life and focusing all your energy and thought into attaining it. Thinking positively about your goal consistently will open your eyes to possibilities you would not have seen otherwise. It’s like having all of your Spidey senses tingling toward your prize. 

The Law of Attraction will also generate positive energy from you and your surroundings and direct them toward your mission. Many doors open for us when we apply this law; some lead to opportunity and success, while others lead to loneliness and misery. It is essential to discern the value of what we are focused on and its impact on us and those around us. For now, our goal is to heal and thrive while we are doing it, so we must consider that when we apply this rule. 


Remember, as you take off after your new dreams and goals, you will likely encounter varying world views about how best to pursue those goals. Those world views are the new strategies that influence our thinking and behavior. While they may sound great on the surface, not all motivational voices are equal, and some ideas, followed to their logical conclusion, will lead to death. In this chapter, I want to examine the works of several authors and extrapolate their ideas in application to your current situation. This will require wisdom. And with wisdom, we will lay the groundwork for you to successfully navigate the various ideas impacting modern culture and guide you to the ideas that will bring life. This will ensure your healing is complete and your mind and spirit are truly free.

The first author is Napoleon Hill and his influential book, Think and Grow Rich. Now, I know some of you in the audience who are already familiar with Napoleon Hill will be groaning, and others will be cheering. This book has been divisive, with many people claiming Hill was a conman and others nearly setting up a temple and exclaiming him a deity.  

Regardless of the validity of the man, his work was deeply impactful and has profoundly affected modern culture's ideas about success and the innate power of man to change the world around him by thinking. In his book, released in 1937, Napolean claimed to have conducted over twenty years of research and interviews with many individuals who had amassed tremendous wealth over their lifetimes.  In his study he states there are 13 steps to riches. I will hit on the first five before I pivot to cover alignment. Though Hill wrote his book focused on wealth, the principles can apply wherever you have a goal. They are as follows:


1. Desire 

You must start with a powerful and burning desire to acquire or achieve something. In the case of Think and Grow Rich, it was to become wealthy. We discussed this concept in the earlier chapters of this book while discovering a new purpose. And while I agree with the premise, power focusing on a goal with all your heart, soul, mind, and strength can create a type of god out of your dreams. We are made to worship. We will all worship something. And worship, after all, is emptying yourself into what you want most. You will begin to worship anything you pour your entire soul into. A solid and decisive goal is crucial to stepping out of your comfort zone and taking risks to achieve something significant. However, it’s essential to consider your plan's benefits to yourself and those around you, especially your children, as vital. Make sure your dream is serving you and not the other way around. 

Consider your dream as a tool. Wealth as a tool. Purpose as a tool. Use the desire and the dream as the fuel to propel you out of your current state and into something new. Be exceptionally passionate and persistent when going about achieving the goal, but in your pursuit of healing, don’t become a slave to another master.


2. Faith
 
Hill states you must have unwavering faith in yourself and your ability to achieve your goal. Hill is right! Faith is a powerful tool, like pain; it is a currency we can use to move mountains. Just as placing your faith in a relationship can lead to disappointment if it fails, relying only on yourself can open the door to pride and self-importance. We are imperfect, and trusting in ourselves to have all the answers or to find all the answers can leave us hating or disappointed in ourselves when we fail. 

Faith requires humility and the willingness to reach outside yourself for help. That can be speaking with a counselor, talking with friends and loved ones, or relying on a team to help you achieve your goal. There will be days when your faith in yourself is completely eroded, and if you have not taken the time to build a good support group, you will fail. You are creating your house on the sand, and your foundation is fallible and subject to washing away under pressure. 

Relying solely on yourself and having unshakeable faith in your abilities can be dangerous, as it may tempt you to view people as mere objects to achieve your goals rather than a supportive community of individuals you aim to inspire and uplift as you progress. While the former approach may lead to success, it can also lead to isolation and loneliness. 

Some people, including Hill, will say it is more important to rely on yourself and that others will likely discourage you from achieving your goal. While that may be true, a better solution would be to ensure the people you are listening to and confiding in will support you and push you to achieve your goal, not the other way around. Providing you are setting good boundaries; then you are already filtering out relationships that stand against you and opening yourself up more to people who respect your boundaries and encourage your success.  

Viewing people as valuable partners in your journey, sharing your aspirations with them, and inviting them to participate and benefit from them can create solid and meaningful relationships that are mutually rewarding. So, have faith in something greater than yourself, yes! Share your vision and dreams with people around you, absolutely! And look for opportunities to partner with people who are excited to see you succeed and participate in the benefits of your success. 


3. Auto-Suggestion 

This step is about using positive talk to reinforce your beliefs and goals. Napoleon believed that fears are only a state of mind, and auto-suggestions create subliminal messages that alter your state of mind and, therefore, the state of reality itself. With his steps, you can will your desired outcomes into existence and erase fear with thought.

Again, this is great and powerful advice, but it is important to realize where those beliefs and goals lead and what happens if all of your goals focus on you. Let’s return to the analogy of the window I used in Chapter Three. In Chapter Three, I stated that you can see the world around you when you look outside a window. You can expand your horizons and connect with others by observing their lives. I then mentioned that whenever you experience something negative - hurt, pain, or loss, you paint a streak of black on the outside of the window. Eventually, the window will be entirely coated with black and no longer be a window. It will be a mirror; all you can see is yourself, which is generally distorted. 

Likewise, when you are focused entirely on goals that only serve you, you create black streaks on your window. For every time you sacrifice a relationship to get a break, paint a line. For every broken promise and white lie, add another streak. For every late night you spend working and miss a daddy-daughter date, line. Eventually, the entire window will become a mirror, leading to a wholly selfish existence. You will have left one prison and stepped directly into another. Keep your goals as motivational guides, and look for ways to serve others as you grow. Make sure the positive talk you use builds you up and sets you free. 


4. Specialized Knowledge and Skill

You don’t know what you don’t know. That’s why you’re reading this book. You want information that will help you get from where you are to somewhere better. You can think about what you want to accomplish until your fish tank runs dry, or you can determine what skills you need to achieve your goal. 

I read a book a while back that challenged how I saw the world. It’s called The Strangest Secret  by Earl Nightingale. If you have not read or heard this book you must do so. He starts the book by defining what success is. In it, he states the best explanation he ever found was, “Success is the progressive realization of a worthy ideal. If a man is working toward a predetermined goal and knows where he is going, then that man succeeds. If he is not doing that, he is a failure.” I’ve looked back on my life many times and have seen all the benefits I gained in my heart, mind, and spirit from following my dreams, even when I did not achieve the goal I had hoped for. The journey life has taken me on was often far better than what I had imagined or planned. Just because one part of my dream or goal, even a significant piece, hasn’t been fulfilled doesn’t negate the successes and victories I have experienced. I can write this book today not because I have an Oscar or a top ten box office film; I can write this book today because I had a goal and dream, I worked tirelessly to improve myself and my skills, and I persevered when everything else in me told me to give up. It’s as Earl says, “Never give up on the dream just because of the time it will take to accomplish it. The time will pass anyway.”

The success has been the man I have become along the way, and when I finally achieve the goals I set out for myself, it will be because I am now aligned with them by who I have become, and I am ready! Acquire the knowledge and skills you need to win. This alignment is the most significant part of imagining a new reality for yourself. In Think and Grow Rich, Hill states that as we increase our knowledge through experience, education, and Master Mind Alliances formed through cooperation with others or special training, we should constantly look for ways to organize the knowledge for specific use and definite purpose. 

I love this. Because, as we discussed prior, the idea of definite purpose can be aligned with our eternal perspective, an ultimate meaning or goal that lies beyond the confines of our existence and touches the infinite. With an objective like that in mind, all knowledge and experiences we acquire can be understood as steppingstones and materials to build our ultimate reality. Even our pain and suffering can be bent to serve a definite purpose. No experience is wasted. No time is lost. Everything is redeemable and valuable. 


5.  Imagination

Imagination is one of the most exciting principles for me. I spend most of my waking existence in my dreams. It enables me to escape reality's confines and touch the limitless divine. When I free myself from the confines of the reality of my current circumstance, I open myself to an infinite array of possibilities. I can draw on the ideas and solutions I discover there to serve my dream and my eternal goal.

Hill states there are two forms of imagination—one limited to circumstances and current knowledge. He calls this the Synthetic Imagination. The Synthetic Imagination is like replaying a movie in your head with the same characters, experiences, and frames of reference without introducing anything novel. "It merely works with the material of education, experience, and observation without which it is fed." It is very much the process Artificial Intelligence uses in its current iteration to crank out images and ideas from existing material without contribution to anything Divine. The creation of something from nothing! 

Unlike computers, we can imagine realities where anything is possible. Our minds have no limitations, and we can spend limitless time creating. This infinite imagination sets us apart from everything we have discovered in the universe. This is why it is so powerful when the book of Genesis declares, "God made man in His image and likeness,"

Like its creator, humanity can manifest new ideas and create something where there was nothing only moments before. Therefore, this ability to develop and innovate reflects the Creator's divine image in us, enabling us to bring new concepts and creations into our lives. We can define our purpose, discover our dreams, imagine future possibilities, align ourselves with the options, and manifest results that change our lives. Incredible gifts have been given to us to create a new future, and a tremendous part of our success begins with our ability to use our imaginations to create new possibilities and then look for opportunities to make them happen. 

While I agree with Hill that our imaginations are the source of our dreams and desires, I'm afraid I must disagree with Hill's notion of the magic of imagination to sweep aside all opposition. I don't have the power to make something happen because I think it or will it be so. I am convinced, instead, that our imaginations open our minds to other possibilities. We become aware of alternatives, people, and places, and as we focus our energy and attention, we will discover new ways to use them to achieve our goals. 

Because I went through all the hard work of educating myself and training myself to be ready, and because I am open to and actively looking for opportunities that move me toward my goal, I am prepared to step into the new success and reality I have created. In that sense, I accept and apply Hill's fifth principle of imagination. 

Labeling imagination as serendipity, a combination of alignment and attraction, would be more appropriate. Serendipity, more aptly labeled, is hope for and awareness of an opportunity. Suppose I sit in a hotel and am neither hungry nor interested in being bothered. A hotel attendant enters the room, declaring he has chocolate. I will likely be unmoved or disinterested in his announcement. I would be perturbed. However, if I had been thinking about chocolate all morning and the attendant entered the room with the same offer, my response would have been the opposite. I’d declare it nothing short of a miracle. "I was just thinking about chocolate and blam! Chocolate! The universe is giving me a sign!" 

If Hill and I were in the same room, experiencing the same event, he would likely declare his thinking had made the chocolate appear. My focus had been on getting chocolate and wanting it so badly that when the attendant came, I was both ready and excited to receive it. 

To apply this concept to our healing process. It would be similar to my decision to learn to be a great guitar player. I've always been decent, but I want to be great. Up until this point, I have only taught myself. Because I am healing and trying to break my cycle of self-pity, I have decided to attend a gala my friend Lucy is putting on to showcase her new album. While at the concert, I overhear an older gentleman telling a young lady he was sorry he missed the guitar lesson earlier that day. Opportunity! Serendipity! Creative Imagination! Whether I manifested the occasion or not is unprovable. Still, I focused on a goal, opened myself up to something new, was aware of the opportunity, and took advantage of it.  

I like how Earl Nightingale explains this phenomenon in The Strangest Secret when he says our brains are like a fertile field; like a field, the brain doesn’t care what you plant in it, whatever seeds you sow, they will grow and prosper. Whatever thoughts you imagine or focus on, your mind will look for ways to make it align with reality. If you sow seeds of doubt and self-hatred, then it will look for and create opportunities and thoughts that align with your worldview. If you sow the seeds of success and gain, your mind will harvest opportunities, opportunities that we must be aligned with to gain from them. 


The Law of Alignment 

While the Law of Attraction is making yourself spiritually and emotionally available to opportunity, the Law of Alignment is about bringing yourself physically and mentally into balance with what you are trying to attract. For example, if I am a five-hundred-pound guy living in my mother's basement and want to date a supermodel, no matter how hard I visualize and wish it, I will not date a supermodel. I offered her nothing of value that would attract her to me in the first place. However, if I can, I will hit the gym, eat healthy, study for a good job, and then go where supermodels spend time. In any area where I need more alignment with my dream, I need to take the steps necessary to improve myself to be ready when the opportunity I have attracted comes. But how do we determine what attributes we must possess to align with our goals? We must transcend the common mind thoughts that got us where we are and tap into our quantum minds. The parts of our brains that hold our genius. 

For years, much of our educational system has taught us what to think and not how to think. Part of breaking free from our pain, mental prisons, and struggles is to be able to ask why and how questions that allow us to transcend our situation and access quantum thinking. We can view our problems from a bird's eye in the quantum mind. We can put our struggles into perspective. As a good friend of mine, speaker, and author Bruce Wright wrote, "When in Quantum Mind (the place where our genius is waiting to be found and actuated), we automatically and effortlessly contemplate the question far differently than when we are stuck in Common Mind." To have the Law of Attraction work for us, we must engage with our quantum minds to discover new solutions and then align ourselves with those solutions. But how do we get there?

While many scientists and psychologists consider the quantum mind a mental state achievable by rational thought alone, I suggest an alternative. To access the part of our minds where we can transcend ordinary view, we must tap into the more profound resources of our souls. Our souls are the bridge between the physical world and the divine. In the book of Genesis there is a story about a man named Jacob who laid down to rest one night after a long journey. He was running away from his brother, who was trying to kill him. As he put his head on a rock and looked up, he saw a vision of a stairway leading into heaven and the angels of the Lord ascending and descending the stairs. He was shocked, and when he woke up, he declared this was none other than the House of God, the gateway to heaven. Later, Jesus Christ was talking with a man named Nathanael and told him. "You will see heaven opened and the angels of God ascending and descending on the Son of Man" (John 1:51). Jesus was connecting Himself with the stairway to heaven Jacob saw thousands of years earlier and was pointing to His death on the cross. The angels ascending and descending between heaven and earth testify to Jesus reestablishing peace between sinners on earth and God in heaven. 

These metaphors in these stories are significant to our healing process because there is a stairway between the divine and us. There is a place where we can go internally, opening our hearts and minds to endless possibilities and answers. We can tap into the eternal and find solutions. We can transcend our ordinary senses and access the mind and spirit of the creator God. 

Please make no mistake: what we are fighting against is physical and spiritual. There are forces beyond our hurt using our broken home to wreak havoc on us. Another great verse in the Bible says, "For we are not fighting against flesh-and-blood enemies, but against evil rulers and authorities of the unseen world, against mighty powers in this dark world, and against evil spirits in the heavenly places.” You've seen it. You know it's true when you look at what your Ex says about you, when you face a judge who hands down an unjust ruling, when they take your children away from you, and you lose control over every area of your life. You can tell you are not fighting against everyday struggles but against something far more sinister. 

You've probably felt it too, late at night in your empty home, a sudden despair or fear that clamps onto your heart like a vice. You've felt the explainable "gut check," the "something is not right gut check," and the "hair standing up on your arms check." No matter how hard you try to talk yourself out of it, you can't eliminate it. No matter how much you drink or work out. Those forces of the unseen world use your circumstances to inflict harm on you. 

The beautiful part about the stairway from heaven is the option to access the divine to help us drive out the things we cannot see. I remember working tremendously hard with my attorney to get all my paperwork in line, to say the right words, and to fight with everything in my body for my family. But one night, in deep December, as I was filling out some paperwork and praying, I felt the spirit of God touch my heart, and I heard, "Get out of My way." It passed as thought, and as quickly as it had come, it passed. I returned to my work, and it happened again. "Get out of My way. You are in My way. A spirit is attacking you through what your wife is doing, and you are getting in My way." Up until that point, I had been praying with everything in my being that my daughter would be with me and I would win in court, but at that moment, my prayer changed. I prayed. "God, I think I know what is best for my daughter, and that is to be with me, but if you know what is best for her, that is what I want. I let go." It didn't mean I quit fighting. "Pray like it all depends on God and work like it all depends on you,” Dave Ramsey told me when I worked with him. I think he heard it from Zig Zigler, but it was true. I would work toward what I thought was best, but I would surrender the outcome to God, to the divine. 

There was a spirit behind my Ex's attacks, and I found out months later in a miraculous fashion. It was a Thursday night, and I had been reading my Bible and praying in my office. My custody case was on Monday morning, and my attorney's best encouragement was, "It's fifty-fifty; this could go either way.” I cried out for some answer and heard in my spirit, "Tomorrow, you'll know tomorrow." 

I waited all day the next day, and nothing happened. I thought I had imagined it. Then, at five o'clock, when I was leaving work, I got a call from my Ex's best friend. She told me I couldn't let my daughter go to another state, it wasn't safe for her, and that she was willing to testify on my behalf in court. Several other things happened in short order between my Ex and me, but suffice it to say, my attorney told me when my day in court was over. "Jason, in the twenty-five years I've been doing this, I’ve never had a case like yours. It's not possible. It was a miracle." There it was, just as I had heard in December. The battle was not physical but a supernatural, unseen conflict by which my circumstance had nearly destroyed me. 

To truly align ourselves with the most significant outcomes, we must prepare our hearts and minds, we must educate ourselves, and work our hardest to ensure we have done everything within our power to design our physical selves to attract and align with our dreams, but we must also listen to the eternal and invisible part of our beings. We straddle the two worlds, like the stairway to heaven. We can hear wisdom from above when we pray and listen with our hearts. We can align ourselves with the reality of who we are and the areas of ourselves we cannot see. Transcendent thought can set us free when we don't surrender to our pre-existing biases or egos, let go of the false belief that we possess all the answers, or follow along because it's the easiest or safest route. Aligning ourselves to our dreams and goals means educating ourselves, working hard, and then listening for feedback from our souls, seeing if there is anything else we still need to include.

Food for Thought

What ideas and thoughts are limiting the way I see myself? Have I been saying them out loud and speaking them over myself? These destructive thoughts need to be replaced with the truth. It doesn’t have to be what is presented now but should reflect who you will be. I will be healed from this pain and in a better place. I will have a successful company and a healthy relationship. I am valuable. We want to plant seeds that help move us toward our dreams and reinforce our purpose. Then, we need to align ourselves with the statements we make to be ready when the opportunity comes. 


