







CHAPTER TEN
THE SWORD OF GRATITUDE

“Gratitude is the healthiest of all human emotions. The more you express gratitude for what you have, the more likely you will have even more to express gratitude for.” Zig Ziglar


I Am Grateful!

Through all of my life’s experiences. I have found one action that has enabled me to rise above my circumstances more than any other. That is gratitude, having a thankful heart and mind.  As Zig Ziglar mentioned in the quote above, gratitude is the healthiest of all emotions, and I have found, as his quote suggests, that the more I express gratefulness, the more I have had to be thankful for. 

I grew up in a loving home. As a young man, my father was selfish. Those were words from his lips, and I believed him, though my memory was remarkably the opposite. I remember a father who loved me tremendously and set an example of what it meant to be a man. I have always looked up to him; to this day, he is the first person I go to when I need advice. My father told me that having me as a son changed him; life broke pieces off of him that were messy, and he became a more loving and attentive father. 

As an older man, he is full of wisdom and care. His heart and home are open to many a wandering soul, and he has been a father to countless “orphans” trying to find their way. I am thankful for him. His strength and love have sincerely, entirely, and richly blessed me. When I am overcome with frustration or hurt from loss, I remember all the times he was there for me, coming to my games, late-night chats, hikes into the mountains, trips around the country, having fun, and singing together. I focus on him and allow my heart to open and receive all the blessings he has given me at once. They are there whenever I need them; all I have to do is recall them and say out loud. “Thank you for my dad! I’m so grateful for a faithful and loving father.” 

My mother is the embodiment of love. She exudes it from every pore of her body. She has always been there to hug me when I fell. Her encouragement built me up and helped me believe I could do anything. She has demonstrated what sacrifice is and how it always came back to her tenfold, no matter what she gave up for others. She is selfless and wise. Her heart always seems to find a way to soar over the world's trouble, find out where people are hurting the most, and then shoot, like a liquid, into the wounds of the nations and heal them. Whether serving the young mothers of America, the Sudanese in Africa, the Haitians, or the Ukrainians, she is always touching lives. 

Whenever I begin to believe I am too small or insufficient, I instantly remember her, flooded with strength and encouragement. She fills me with hope no matter the distance. I say “Thank you for my mom. She is amazing! I’m so grateful to have such a wonderful woman who pushes me to be the best man I can be.” 

I have remarried and been with my beautiful bride for over ten years. She is the light of my life. She is resilient to a fault. More beautiful than any woman I have ever seen, inside and out. I have watched her overcome insurmountable odds to achieve great things. She has taught me so much about appreciating and taking care of myself. She has continually reminded me to fight for what I know is correct and not back down, no matter the cost. 

I’ve learned more from her about letting go and pressing on than anyone else. I have watched her touch the lives of thousands of people through her words and her talents, and I have been inspired.  She has loved me no matter what. She has stood by my side, supported me, and encouraged me through thick and thin. I had never understood what true love could be until she floated into my life. She makes me laugh, and I love just listening to her. Even if she doesn’t understand sometimes, she lets me be me and loves me the way I am. “I am profoundly grateful for my wife. I adore her and couldn’t be happier to be blessed with such an incredible woman.” She reminds me that all of the struggles I have gone through were worth it. Without them, I wouldn’t have been the man she fell in love with. A better version of myself! 

My daughter is incredible! No words can describe the pride I feel when I think of her. She is an overcomer, wise beyond her years, full of life and joy. She teaches me daily what it means to love others and to put God above everything else. She excites me with her creativity and her delight in life. Her way of looking at the world turns my preconceptions on their heads, and I cannot help but laugh. Everything seems blessedly absurd when viewed through her eyes. She is a faithful and fearsome friend. She is good at letting go and accepting what she cannot change, but never stops pressing on toward her goals. She is fearless, and despite anxiety about life and her dreams, she presses on, barreling into the unknown with her head held high, embracing each new challenge with passion.  
Whenever I doubt my ability to lead, I remember her faith in me and her appreciation of what I gave her. “Thank you for my daughter! Thank you for the opportunity to raise and care for such a remarkable individual!”

My new son, an unexpected gift, has a smile that lights up the world. The excitement he feels when he sees me shakes his entire body, and he is overcome with joy. His wide-eyed wonder at everything reminds me to see the world in fresh, new ways and to appreciate every little thing, no matter how small. His delight in his mother, the people around him, and his love for food connect me with the most meaningful parts of living. I could never imagine my life without him. His presence is a constant reminder of the love I share with my wife and the result of our union. 

He also represents a second chance for me. An opportunity to raise a little boy with the woman I love - and who loves me. “Thank you for another chance to raise a child in a loving home and not have to do it alone. I am deeply grateful to have an heir and a boy to share all the cool things I’ve learned in life and to pass on what I know to a new generation of Crossmans.” 

The list of things I am grateful for goes on and on and on. From my friends to work, places I’ve been, and sites I’ve seen. From awards I’ve won to foods I’ve eaten. Health, wisdom, joy, and my salvation are all things I can be thankful for, and when life kicks me and tries to keep me down, I get up by remembering the people and things around me that have blessed me. I shared some examples of how I express my gratitude and why, even when things look their lowest, there is always something I can hold onto, pulling me up. 

Maybe for you, it’s not wonderful your parents. You might have had a very tough upbringing. But there are other things you can be thankful for: friends, freedom, your job, nature, fresh air. Maybe there isn’t anything that comes to mind for you to be thankful for; that’s okay. Start small. I’m grateful for my favorite couch (one of the few things my Ex didn’t take away from me), the smell of coffee, video games all night with friends, the laughter of children, the sound of the wind in the trees, stars filling the sky, snow, rain, sunshine - each a miracle in itself if considered outside your circumstances. 

I’ve been through some very long, dark seasons where no end seemed in sight—no end to the pain, no light in the darkness. Much like a rudderless ship at the mercy of a stormy sea, I couldn’t see the lighthouse of my destination. But I was surrounded by other lighthouses, keeping me from crashing on the rocks and, ultimately, guiding me in the right direction. They remind me not to give up: the storm will pass, the sun will shine, and the rudder can be fixed.


A Knife in the Knee

When you have a large knife stuck in your knee, it is hard to focus on anything else. The pain is excruciating and all-consuming. At the moment, nothing else matters more than taking the knife out and stopping the pain. In the case of the blade, you can most likely take it out and treat the wound, but in the case of divorce, it is more like the knife stays in, and the person who is supposed to be helping you is twisting it instead, making the pain that much more unbearable. 

Likewise, when any long-term relationship, especially marriage, ends horribly and goes on for years, it isn't easy to care about anything else. But unlike a physical wound which affects part of the body, emotional wounds exist in the mind and manifest themselves in the body. That emotional and mental pain, unlike physical pain, can be remediated, even temporarily, by shifting our focus to something else.  

That something else is gratitude. 

Focus on the parts of our life that do work. It is a sword that can cut through the chains of despair and allow you to connect your heart and mind to something better and more fulfilling. Of course, it’s not a one-time fix. It is a tool we must use consciously and repeatedly; the more we use it, the stronger and sharper the weapon becomes as we practice gratitude and thankfulness as our default setting. 

Sometimes, I am awakened by someone talking in the middle of the night, only to discover it is me. I am giving thanks for something or someone in my life. It bubbles over and fills every area of life. It becomes a shield. 


A Dragon in the City

Another analogy would be to consider emotional trauma as a dragon that lurks in the mountains and occasionally comes to burn the entire village down, then flies off again. Even though the attack is quick, the damage can be extensive. And, unlike the damage inflicted on the city, the dragon doesn’t stick around. 

Sometimes, you can see the beast in the distance; other times, it returns to sleep deep within its caves, and just when you begin to let your guard down and breathe a sigh of relief, some idiot dwarf wakes him up again, and he returns for round fifty. You are entirely at the dragon's mercy if you don’t have the proper weapons to defend your town. You have no boundaries, no self-defense, and all you can do is stand by and be consumed. 

Enters the sword of gratitude. How can being grateful stop a dragon? you might ask. We’ve already established if you do nothing, you will be consumed. So anything better than doing nothing is… well, better. 

Let’s say you begin to express gratitude for what hasn’t been burned. The castle still stands, and the stonework is more or less intact. The city was built on a lake, so there was water to extinguish the fire. The woodwork - well, the townspeople are talented builders; they’ve had a lot of practice!

If you’re smart, you’ll recognize the enemy and his tactics and prepare for the next assault. You might decide the best course of action is to rebuild the city somewhere else—beyond the dragon’s reach—and that might not be a bad idea. But if you choose to stand your ground and rebuild where it stands, strengthen the areas where you’re most vulnerable. Surround yourself with builders who’ve faced their dragons: friends, family, mentors, priests, pastors, rabbis, or wise counselors. Lean on them, learn from them when you feel overwhelmed, and you’ll find an array of weapons to fight with and tools to rebuild.

As you rebuild, make it your goal to be of service to them. Maybe you’re thankful for your work and what you’re good at. Like the craftsmen in the town, you can pour more energy into improving your job or even finding a new hobby.

Gratitude's real power is to help take the hyperfocus off your immediate circumstances and broaden it to encompass the big-picture vision of your life. Thankfulness is a shift of mind to consider all the resources, relationships, and privileges that make us great and have helped us along the way. 

There was a great quote by the author Nicole Reed in her book Ruining You: “Sometimes the bad things that happen to us often put us directly into the most wonderful things that will ever happen to us.” It’s true! Your best days are still ahead because you will come through this a better, stronger person. 

Developing an eternal perspective allows you to see the person you will be as a result of your response to hardship; the fog clears, and you can recognize and seize opportunities. This perspective generates a reflex of gratitude even in the most challenging situations.  


Natural Relief

 There may still be some people who have a hard time finding anything to be grateful for despite all the blessings. There is another source of hope to which I have turned and still turn to find solace and to build my hope. That is nature. I grew up on the coast of Maine. Centuries ago, my family settled in Vinalhaven, an island in Penobscot Bay, and many of them still live there. I have deep roots in the sea and find rest on New England's dark and rocky coasts. 

Whenever I return to my family home, I walk out to Lane's Island. It’s a peninsula on the windward side of the island. Sheets of ever-present fog blanket the low-lying shrubs and rocky outcroppings. There is a long dirt road pockmarked with divots and puddles, compliments of the climate's strong forces of erosion. Strong people live here—people who have endured countless cold winters, exposed to the elements, and isolated by timelessness.

I always feel energized and recharged when I step down the winding road to the sea. The gravel crunching beneath my feet cast a melancholy echo around the valley. It is breathtaking in its somberness; peaceful and quiet. You can hear history whisper tales of what was in every breath of wind sweeping in from the sea. Circling gulls echo the refrain as they cry out to one another, marking their latest discovery; often, a poor starfish stranded during high tide or a crab that had wandered precariously close to shore. 

When I reach the sea, I close my eyes and listen. There is nothing more needed. The cool, moist spray of mist greets my skin, and the wind embraces my body. Nature always speaks to us, whispering words of wonder and power. If we take the time to listen, the elements offer whole sermons of comfort.

Sitting still is difficult, especially when we want solutions. However, recentering yourself in the timelessness of your surroundings will help you appreciate the simple things we take for granted daily: sunshine, fresh air, birds, trees, or running water. All of nature is created for us to thrive. Its atmosphere is in perfect balance, so no matter where I go, except to its extremes, I don’t have to wonder if I won’t be able to breathe. You see! Life is a gift, and nature reminds us of that. 

Nature is also a love letter. From the cutest kittens to the fiercest lions, from the highest mountains to the depth of the sea, the wonder and majesty of creation testify to a loving Creator—a God who finds the good in what He has made and who is willing that we should be the benefactors.  

To me, the wind is the best representation of His presence. When God gave His name to Moses thousands of years ago, His name came as  YHWH or YHVH, which, when pronounced correctly, is the inhalation and exhalation of breath, essentially declaring Himself the Breath of Life. It explains why many people who cannot connect with God in a church or building have found God in communing with nature. There is a peace that comes with the inhalation and exhalation of breath. So, even if you cannot find peace or thankfulness in your busy life, you can escape to nature, close your eyes, and focus on your body's feelings. If it makes you cry, then cry. If you laugh, then laugh with everything in you. Whatever you receive, do it with gratefulness and joy. Take what you have learned from it and add it to your list of things you are thankful for. 


Beauty in Destroying / Beauty in Creating

There was this great place in Nashville where, for a couple of bucks, you could get a sledgehammer, with an hour to break anything within reach. It was incredibly cathartic—a physical expression of what you felt inside. You were allowed to inflict your pain on your environment in a harmless way. You’d feel better as your inner rage exploded through the hammer, absorbed by an old PC, TV screen, or refrigerator. The pressure that had been building up inside was relieved, leaving you calm enough to put things in perspective; to think instead of react.

"Everything in moderation." I have heard that quote many times throughout my life, and it was, more often than not, supported by my experience. Finding a way to bring harmony into my life by not having anything in excess has created the most contentment and joy. While destroying things is not always the best solution, and rarely without consequence, doing so in a way that didn’t hurt anyone brought a kind of peace. 

Hitting the gym is a form of constructive destruction. I am pouring my energy into an activity that creates micro-tears in my muscles, and those tears, ultimately, strengthen my muscles. I am grateful I can do something that allows me to release energy and, at the same time, make me stronger. This physical exertion parallels what we are enduring emotionally. We develop perseverance, and that must work in us for us to become complete. We mature only through the breaking and rebuilding of life's gym. I am grateful that my destruction can lead to balance. I’m thankful that when I am breaking, a resolution is taking place. My experience isn’t for nothing—there is a reason. I am grateful for my suffering. I don’t like it, and I don’t want it to stay, but I can appreciate the growth it brings.

The broken things you destroyed at the junkyard were turned into something new. They created something new from the ashes of what we had broken. We break, we heal, we grow. I even express gratitude in the breaking. I'm not too fond of it, but I am thankful I will be stronger because of it. 


Thankfulness Awakens Grace

Grace is one of the most powerful concepts in the world, and I could dedicate an entire book to cover it. It is one of the most important results of working through the healing process and should be one of the things you covet the most while on your road to recovery. 

Grace exhibits multifaceted qualities. Although there are commonly held understandings of it, individuals grasp grace more deeply on a personal level. It depends on our standing with God and our relationship with others. Grace grows as we grow, and the more we receive it, the greater the outpouring we can extend to others.

The Merriam-Webster Dictionary defines grace as “unmerited divine assistance granted to humans for their regeneration or sanctification.”

We receive grace from God and others to offset our faults and failures. When we extend grace to others, we acknowledge our own shortcomings, offering the same forgiveness and patience we’ve received. It all began with Christ’s work on the cross when He died for the sins of the world. All of us were lost—our sins, failures, and brokenness were leading us toward death. In His grace, God sent His Son to die in our place, covering and removing the debts and deficits within our hearts.

As a result, instead of being seen as undeserving and broken, He took our faults to the cross with Him. When we believe in Him, we become perfect as God intended—not because we suddenly become flawless, but because, through God’s love, He sees us through the lens of grace. This grace is the first part of Merriam-Webster’s definition of the sanctification of humanity. The second part, regeneration, comes from the rebirth that occurs within us when we are made right with God and aligned with who we truly are in the universe—our value and purpose shift from human-doing to human-being. Our worth comes from being connected to God and aligned with the eternal value He imparts to us.

I relied on grace many times while navigating the minefield of single parenthood. There were moments I needed to be more patient, more convivial, or less short-tempered. I often felt like I needed to be more. There was grace to cover the times I felt murderous rage or when I was drowning in self-pity. The healing process is messy. As I mentioned earlier, when I looked in the mirror and said, ‘I love you, and I forgive you,” I was extending to myself; the grace that had already been bought for me, aligning myself with the reality that I was already forgiven—not forgiven to do whatever I wanted and simply say sorry as if waving a get-out-of-jail-free card. That’s not the purpose of grace (though we may still find it, even in such cases, if we are genuinely repentant). There are still costs and consequences, especially when I make choices that continually and willfully lead to death.

Grace can transform our hearts and circumstances. It can heal broken hearts, mend relationships, and help us set and maintain loving boundaries. Whenever I mess up, or something happens to me, I express gratitude and lean into grace. I allow eternal power to flow in, filling the cracks and breaks in my heart. I picture it as pouring epoxy into an old tree, filling the gaps, and creating a smoother, firmer surface. Expressing gratitude opens our hearts and invites healing that regenerates our brokenness. Sometimes the rewards are instantaneous; other times, the salve is applied over time. Regardless of timing, our gratitude and acceptance of grace unlock the next level of healing. 

As the Apostle Paul wrote in his second letter to the early Christian church in Corinth: “My grace is sufficient for you, for my power is made perfect in weakness.’ Therefore, I will boast all the more gladly of my weaknesses so that the power of Christ may rest upon me.” This perspective offers a profoundly life-altering way to view our circumstances.

You can find healing through meditation, conversations with psychologists, and communion with nature; I’m not discounting those valuable tools. Sadly, for the last sixty years, our culture has dismissed the idea of God as foolish, and the results have been damning. We see more broken homes, fractured relationships, prescription drug dependency, anxiety, despair, crime, and corruption everywhere. Why would we do this to ourselves? I don’t know about you, but I’m not fond of the outcome and reject it wholeheartedly. Our compass has been broken. Enter grace! It’s available even for our nation. I strongly recommend learning more about God’s grace to grapple with the deepest levels of suffering while reaping the greatest rewards. It has worked for me and for millions throughout history. I embraced grace and found complete healing that permeated every area of my life. I’ll show you how in the next chapter.


Food For Thought

Do you have a hard time being grateful for anything? What do you think is the reason behind it? How far does it go back? Don't worry if this doesn't come naturally. It's a muscle; like any muscle, you have to work it to make it grow. Now's a good time to start slow. Start with simple things. Close your eyes and focus on the first three things that come to mind that bring you a level of happiness. Then say or think I'm grateful for _____. Then, please explain why you are thankful for it and how it improves your life. What would it mean to have more of that in your life?

In my darkest moments, the thought of my daughter always brought me joy and served as a refuge when I was at my lowest. The tricky part was that seeing her filled me with gratitude while also reminding me that her mom was tearing her away from me. It was a double-edged sword, yet that gratitude, coupled with the pain I felt, provided the energy I needed to fight for her during the long haul.














