


CHAPTER THREE
“A NEW PURPOSE”


"The two most important days in life are the day you were born, and the day you find out why." – Attributed to Mark Twain.

Again, There’s Always Someone Else to Blame 

Other people who aren't us, which happens to be everyone else, have their idea of happiness. The choices they make as they pursue what they believe makes them happy are factors we cannot often control. But they are factors that can profoundly impact our lives nonetheless. For example, a man goes to a bar and gets hammered. He fights with his girlfriend, flips out, and, in sheer rage, speeds off in his car and drives straight into you while you are on your way home, ending your plans for the evening. Other people's decisions can drastically change our futures. We are surrounded by eight billion other people, all making decisions that can impact us, so It's not a matter of if; it's a matter of when. It's important to latch on to something that will help pull us through the soul's darkest nights. Something we can rely on to guide us back to shore when we've been swept out to sea. 
In my 45-plus years on earth, I found one of the best weapons we have to combat the trials of life and the impact of other people's choices is a powerful purpose. Time and time again, my aim has kept me grounded. It has enabled me to take the focus off of my problems and shift the energy toward solutions.

As I mentioned in the previous chapter, you can choose to be a victim or take ownership of what has happened to you, especially if you believe it wasn't your fault, and then decide to do something differently to change the outcome to something more favorable. I'll give you a simple example with an equation you can use and then apply it to something more complicated. 

When my daughter was seven or eight, she played with the next-door neighbor's kids. They had a sizable family, too, so it was not uncommon for the older kids to play much more aggressive and physical games in which the little ones would inevitably try to compete and, ultimately, end up hurt or crying. 

On one such occasion, she had been playing a game with the hose and squirting the other kids when their grandmother came outside and told my daughter she'd "better not get that baby wet, or else you're going home, and you won't be able to play over here anymore." There was a two-year-old playing with the older kids. 

I was sitting at my desk when the door flew open, and my daughter rushed past, throwing herself on the bed and crying into her pillow. It was impressively dramatic. I'd waited for her to calm down to ask her what happened. She told me what had transpired. 

She had been spraying the other kids when the littlest one ran around the corner from behind her back and into the spray, blasting the baby in the face. She added, "It's not fair. I didn't mean to! And now I can't play with the kids anymore." She'd started sobbing again. 
"Sit up for me." She sat up. "I 'm going to teach you an equation you can use for the rest of your life to help you in situations like this, okay?" She nodded. 


The Equation 

What happened to you (regardless of fault) + What new action can you take that will = Your desired outcome?

"What happened to you?" I asked my daughter.
"I squirted the baby... But it wasn't my fault." 
"I don't care if it was or wasn't your fault. It doesn't matter. You blasted the baby in the face, and you've already been sent home; you can't change that. So you have to accept it and let it go. It's over and done, and you can do nothing about it. Is that correct?"
"Yes."
"Okay, so here's the equation. You take what happened to you; you blasted the baby in the face, and then you add an action you can do that will equal the desired outcome. In your case, that means playing with the kids again. What can you do so you will be able to play with the kids again?
"I can say I'm sorry."
"Okay. Let's see. Does “Blast the baby in the face,” plus “I'm sorry,” equal, play with the kids?" She thought about it for a second and shook her head. 
"No... I could buy his grandmother a flower."
"Okay. Now you're thinking. Does blast the baby in the face + I'm sorry + cute little girl giving grandma a flower = play with the kids?”
To which she replied with an emphatic, "Yes!" Then she added she needed to buy the flower with her own money. Which she did, getting the money from her piggy bank. When we got to the foot of the neighbor's driveway, she stopped me and told me she needed to do this alone. I watched her march up to the house. A few minutes later, she came back, skipping and jumping. I correctly judged it had gone well, and she informed me the act had so taken the grandmother she insisted my daughter stay for dinner and a movie. 

Now. It might not have turned out the way she wanted the first time. But the equation had changed. And now it looked like this: blast the baby in the face + a small child giving a flower she bought with her own money + a personal apology with the child taking accountability for her actions + what new activity = play with the kids. Even if the event had not gone her way, she was stacking the deck in her favor. 

When she got back home later that night, I told her there was a chance it might not have worked. You might never have been able to play with the kids again, no matter what you did, but you were building character in yourself. You were becoming a better person by thinking of others and taking responsibility for what happened; you faced the person you offended eye to eye and asked for forgiveness even though you didn't know if you would get it. All of these things make you a better version of yourself. You were equipping yourself with tools to win in life!

You might be asking what this has to do with purpose and healing from divorce or any traumatic experience. Everything. In my daughter's case, the desire or purpose was straightforward. She wanted to play with the neighborhood kids. 

What you are going through is a thousand times more difficult than squirting a baby in the face and being unable to play with the neighborhood kids. Your equation might have layers and layers of hurts, pains, and broken promises that there will never be enough goodwill to heal. What you have, without divine intervention, is irreparably damaged. So what can you do? How can you start to recover from that? 


Yes or No

You can ask yourself this powerful question. Is what I am doing ever going to salvage what is left of my relationship? Yes or No? If Yes, add more actions to your equation until you achieve your desired result. A good indicator of whether it is possible to heal is if both of you are still adding logs to the fire. Suppose your ex has given up and is not adding anything to the relationship. In that case, your efforts risk becoming codependent, and you are trying and trying and trying but never seeing results. What you are likely doing in your desperate attempt to save the relationship is causing your ex to resent you. You may have noticed any time you "try," your spouse pulls further away. From her point of view, it's as if she was at the beach swimming and perfectly happy, and you kept throwing a lifesaver over her head. No matter what she says, she doesn't want to be saved. Observe her posture; do her eyes glaze over when you are talking? Does she seem happier when you are not around? The hard truth is she doesn't care about your relationship anymore. In her mind, it is already over. 

Is what I am doing ever going to salvage what is left of my relationship? If No, it's time to disconnect from your relationship and accept it is over. Start a new equation that has the highest likelihood of benefiting yourself while at the same time protecting your children from the inevitable disaster of divorce. 

If you feel like a hamster on a wheel, then the chance is high you are, and it's time to get off that crazy contraption. 


I Don't Care About Anything Else

I know that during the season of my life when Kinasha left and I realized the relationship was over, I didn't care much about anything else. Or rather, I didn't know who I was apart from my relationship. Another indication is that I was codependent. I'll talk more about that in another chapter. So what are we to do if we are devastated, facing daily abuse, and have no end in sight? We do what any same person would do. We create a new future to work toward. 


The Purpose, The Value, And The Dream

As mentioned in the previous chapter, I worked at the New York Film Academy. I asked my directing students three challenging questions in my BFA and MFA classes. The first, I have already mentioned. The remaining questions are anchored to the first. THEY MUST ANSWER THESE QUESTIONS before I allow them to direct their first film. 

The questions are personal, so they only need to share their answers if they want to. At the end of the course, I asked them the same questions and had them answer whether or not this exercise had helped them, and everyone said yes. They are as follows:


The Questions

What is your Purpose? - Not why are you here in the class, but why do you exist? 

If you died tomorrow and you could say three things today the world would remember forever, what would they be?

What are your dreams, and what are you willing to do to achieve them?

I know. Those are tough questions. The question of Purpose alone has challenged humanity for thousands of years. Some of the greatest minds have considered it, and numerous books have been written about it. In 1945, shortly after the Second World War, Viktor Frankl wrote a book called, "Man's Search for Meaning." Frankl was a survivor of the Holocaust. As a psychiatrist and a warm-blooded human, he wanted to know why the Jews had suffered so horribly. And, he hoped to solve the other coveted answer that went along with it: If God was good, why did he allow it? 

In a fantastic book, "No Future Without Forgiveness," the Anglican Archbishop of South Africa, Desmond Tutu, pondered the meaning and Purpose of Apartheid. He questioned if there was a path forward that would allow a new purpose for his people that spared more bloodshed. As we will later discuss, confession and forgiveness are at the root of healing. 

The ancient philosophers took a stab at it, too. Epicurus proposed the Purpose of humanity is to achieve tranquility and pleasure through virtue, friendship, and moderation. The Stoics like Seneca argued that our Purpose was to live according to nature, cultivate wisdom, and develop resilience in the face of life's many challenges. Mencius, a Confucian philosopher, believed humanity's Purpose is to create moral patterns of behavior to move us to benevolence and righteousness. 

Soren Kierkegaard stated humanity's Purpose was an ongoing journey toward a genuine relationship with God. He said, "Life can only be understood backward, but it must be lived forward." Only through our experience can we find meaning and understanding, and our trust in God allows us to have faith while we live forward. 

In his book, "The Problem of Pain (If you haven't read this book, you need to!)," one of my favorite authors, C.S Lewis, acknowledges that pain and suffering are part of the human condition. Still, rather than being the destroyer of men, the challenges are opportunities for personal growth. He further states that pain is a sort of megaphone to civilization, calling us to examine our lives, turning our free will away from destructive thoughts and patterns and toward the service of God and our fellow man. 

As you and I can attest, free will, when abused, leads to the most destructive suffering imaginable. So, if the greatest minds in history have all struggled with the question of Purpose and come to different conclusions, how can we do any better? The key lies in the question, your Purpose? Why do you believe you are here? 

Several attributes determine Purpose, but we will focus on four of them. They are the most important, and all other qualities stem from them. They are as follows: 

1. Eternal Perspective

2. Identity

3. Value

4. What You Enjoy


Eternal Perspective 

As a Christian, I have an eternal perspective that leads me to believe we are made for a purpose, in the image of a loving God. I am convinced my life has value and is not an accident; therefore, I live every day confident my situations, no matter how good or bad, will be used to bless my life and make me a better person. It is the underlying reason I can claim redemption is always at work. As a result of my eternal perspective, I am also confident there is life after death, and it is only there I will be free from suffering. 

You might not be a Christian or an atheist or a Buddhist and not believe the same as me, but that doesn't mean you won't benefit from finding an eternal perspective. Would you be okay setting up a wildlife fund that saves baby seals in the Arctic from being hunted for furlong after you are gone? Would you be okay writing a play or painting a picture that inspires generations of children to strive to improve? What about setting up a trust fund so the next three generations of your family can go to college debt-free? Those are eternal perspectives. They are goals that outlive you. 

Another way to phrase the question is, as my friend and author Bruce Wright put it in his book, The Wright Exit Strategy. I paraphrase, "What are your five, ten, twenty, and one-hundred-year goals? What do you want to have happen 100 years from now as a result of something you do while you are alive?" That's a form of eternal thinking that allows you to go beyond your current circumstance and realize all things, good and bad, can be used to accomplish a future goal. For example, the lessons I am learning about love and loss will help me be more compassionate toward those suffering.

Having an eternal perspective allows us to make lemonade from lemons. It will enable us to focus on our children's mental health over getting revenge on our Exes. 


He Carved Her a Chair

My daughter was two when her mother left, and she spent significant time with another man. One of the most complex parts of divorce is your lack of control over who is spending time with your kids. I would never have allowed some of the men Kinasha chose to be anywhere near my daughter, and yet, there I was, listening to her telling me a story about how this man had taken them camping and carved a chair out of a log for her. He made them homemade hot chocolate and gave her a ride on his shoulders. Everything inside me was screaming with the desire to inflict bodily harm on that man; that was my job, not his! But instead, I focused on her. I remember my eternal goal was for this divorce to have as little impact as possible on her.

Besides, it could have been worse. My Ex's new man could have been abusing her. So, I learned to be excited for her. When good things happened while she was away from me, I encouraged her and participated in her joy. It wasn't easy, and I cried horribly from the pain of our separation when she had left. But I never regretted choosing to put her needs first. That is the power of an eternal perspective.



Identity

Having an eternal perspective leads to the development of a deepening identity. Since I am immortal and made by God, I have value, and my worth and meaning do not come from my accomplishments but rather from my identity in God. He made me; what is more, He sent His Son Jesus to die in my place for what I have done; therefore, I have value apart from everything else. 

This identity is why I apply myself to everything I do with 100 percent effort and confidence. It is also why I am fearless in trying and failing. And It is why I often speak in absolutes, believing certain universal truths never change and consistently apply, working for our ultimate good. It has also led me to conclude that I alone have not been blessed with this identity, but every human being, alive and dead, has been endowed with the same unalienable rights. Sound familiar? America's founding forefathers thought so. 

Who do you believe you are? Are you made for a purpose, or are you a mistake resulting from millions of years of chance? You've got to be honest with yourself about what you believe because it will define everything you value.


Value

Value is directly related to what I believe about myself and what I think about those around me. As a direct result of my identity, I find I value authenticity. I love truth and its application to my life through wisdom. I believe in and appreciate the pursuit of perfection and improving myself.  I value experiences that help me grow, show me the path to being a better person more clearly, and strive to mirror the divine in all I do. I also value other people and care deeply about what happens to them. Without my eternal perspective, identity, and values, I would not have written this book. 

For me, based on my eternal perspective and identity, my answer to the second question might read something like this:

Learn to laugh at your mistakes, and don't take yourself too seriously. 

Learn to love and forgive yourself. You will never be perfect and will benefit significantly from being patient with yourself. 

Love others because they are made in the image of God and are essential to Him. We are all in this boat together. 

Ungratefulness kills the happiest of hearts. Be grateful even in defeat. There is always something to be thankful for. 

My list comes from a place ten years distant from my divorce. Yours might be more salty, and that's okay. Nothing you write has to be set in stone because your list will grow and mature as you grow and change, too! 


Finding What You Enjoy

I co-host a podcast with my long-time friend and colleague Cam Cornelius. Our Podcast, Entertainment Dudes, is a collection of interviews with famous and relatively unknown filmmakers from every discipline within the industry. One of my greatest joys during the show is when we dig deep into what makes a person successful, not just in terms of profession, but as a human being. The answers are as exceptional as they are varied. 

On one such occasion, we talked with one of our guests about finding what we love and are passionate about. During the conversation, Cam mentioned, "If you are having trouble finding something you are passionate about, you can look back on your youth. What are some of the things you loved doing? You will likely find they will still be things you enjoy doing today.”

I was a storyteller and loved to make people laugh. It's the same today. You may have enjoyed serving in the community. Maybe you liked fishing with your dad. Whatever it may be, reconnecting with your inner child can be worth trying. 

Of course, we grow and mature, hopefully. So, I’m not talking about allowing our childhood fantasies to dictate what we do as adults. Still, I suggest they can point us in a new direction, especially when we have trouble caring about anything. 

Another source of encouragement and direction may come in serving others. When we are in emotional pain, our thoughts and feelings turn inward. We may limit our contact with others or cut them out entirely. By opening ourselves up to the service of others, we can give our struggle a proper perspective. Our experience is not a one-off random event but one thread in the vast tapestry of the human experience. You will find very quickly how deeply we need each other. 

It's like a mirror. When focusing on others, we see out the window and can take in the world around us. We can watch what others are doing and participate. But when we focus inwardly, it is like painting black on the back of the window until, eventually, the window becomes a mirror, and the only thing reflecting is me. When I focus on my pain, I become all I can see. 

Serving others helps us take the focus off of our pain. At first, you might not have energy for much, and that is okay. Give it your best; when you are tired, pull back until you can do it again. 

I also decided to improve the space around me and my body. I chose to eat healthier, work out, and completely redo my house. Comfort food is only suitable for a quick pick-me-up and doesn't contribute to future relationship success. Investing in yourself and others is a powerful way to discover what you enjoy. Once you find that "thing," you will have something you can put all your negative energy into. It becomes an escape value on your emotions, keeping you from being completely overrun. The real power of connecting with what you enjoy is when those things are promoted into visions and dreams. 


Food For Thought:

Rediscovering purpose is the most significant step to creating a new and exciting future for yourself. This will enable you to build momentum, allowing you to dream again.

What was my purpose when I think of life before I was married? Is it essential today? 

What is my purpose now? Do I know what it is, or do I even care? 

What do I enjoy? Can I turn that hobby into a career? Can I make it work for me?

What are my values? What is important to me?

Be very honest with yourself. Can I ever get my relationship with my wife back? Will working on myself and rediscovering my purpose and passions help or hurt my chances of healing my relationship? 
If my relationship can never be mended, will it help or hurt me to have a clear purpose, vision, and dreams to work toward?
