



CHAPTER TWELVE
THE JOURNEY AHEAD - CONCLUSION

If
 
“If you can keep your head when all about you   
    Are losing theirs and blaming it on you,   
If you can trust yourself when all men doubt you,
    But make allowance for their doubting, too;   
If you can wait and not be tired by waiting,
    Or being lied about, don’t deal in lies,
Or being hated, don’t give way to hating,
    And yet don’t look too good, nor talk too wise:

If you can dream—and not make dreams your master;   
    If you can think—and not make thoughts your aim;   
If you can meet with Triumph and Disaster
    And treat those two impostors just the same;   
If you can bear to hear the truth you’ve spoken
    Twisted by knaves to make a trap for fools,
Or watch the things you gave your life to, broken,
    And stoop and build ’em up with worn-out tools:

If you can make one heap of all your winnings
    And risk it on one turn of pitch-and-toss,
And lose, and start again at your beginnings
    And never breathe a word about your loss;
If you can force your heart and nerve and sinew
    To serve your turn long after they are gone,   
And so hold on when there is nothing in you
    Except the Will, which says to them: ‘Hold on!’

If you can talk with crowds and keep your virtue,   
    Or walk with Kings—nor lose the common touch,
If neither foes nor loving friends can hurt you,
    If all men count with you, but none too much;
If you can fill the unforgiving minute
    With sixty seconds’ worth of distance run,   
Yours is the Earth and everything that’s in it,   
    And—which is more—you’ll be a Man, my son!”

If - By Rudyard Kipling 

This poem, written in the late 1800s by Rudyard Kipling, was powerful to me growing up. It embodied much of what my father has taught me and did it in such a compelling way. It was too good not to post in its entirety and too wonderful not to share for those who have never read it. It is a story about balance and effort, dreams and purpose. It is about setting good boundaries and allowing others to do the same. 
The line that stands out the most to me is, "If you can meet with Triumph and Disaster and treat those two imposters the same." Having gone through a divorce and having experienced the mental, emotional, spiritual, and financial ruin of it all, I can honestly say it was one of the most significantly essential times in my life, and it helped shape me into the man I am today, a man who can forgive, who pushed toward his dreams and toward the future, who has learned boundaries and a deeper understanding of the love of myself and others. I have a deeper faith and am a more stalwart person. I am grateful for the lessons and am more aware of the actions and choices that lead to my suffering. I am far more open to loving with my palms wide open and face up, allowing people to come and go if they choose, and not holding so tightly to those who do not want to stay. 

I have found freedom on the other side of tragedy, and I am grateful to be able to share the lessons of that journey with you. As you have read this book, you have found thoughts and ideas you can apply to your situation. May these words give you the strength to fight and not give up. 

Choose Something Different 

As you go forward, remember that you can choose a different path. And while you cannot change what happened to you, you have everything you need to make choices that lead to a new and exciting outcome. Use the equation I taught my daughter as a way to change your perception of your situation. Right or wrong, what happened to you has already happened. What can you do today to add to what has happened so you can move closer toward your new goal? Even if you never achieve your intended purpose, you have added unique characteristics and choices you can pull from to strengthen your character and attract new and exciting opportunities. 


Pain Working for You

Make your pain work for you. Let pain be the motivator to get unstuck. Let your desire to end your suffering be the fuel to push past your challenges and create something new. If you are willing to embrace the suffering and recognize it for what it is, an experience that will pass, you can convert the pain into an ally working for you. Don't be a slave to suffering! I will not be a slave to suffering. Suffering, you serve me. 


Victims Don't Win

Don't get stuck in the victim mentality, blaming everyone else for everything wrong that happened to you. One of the first signs you are giving in to this poisonous ideology is when you hear yourself saying, "I can't because they…" If you often visualize yourself pointing at other people as the reason you cannot win, then you are not taking power over your situation and you are surrendering to the destroyer. Again, it's not a magic wand. It is a process, and it takes time. You won't leap out of the victim mentality like a leprechaun. You will crawl out like a man climbing out of quicksand. You will grab onto anything you can find to pull yourself out. You will cry out for help. By refusing to accept being a victim, you will attract victory; when it comes, you will be ready because of your perseverance! 
 

Discover the Power of Purpose

You are not an accident. You have a purpose for being here; even if you have not been made aware, answers await you. Ask yourself tough questions like, "Who am I apart from my relationship?" Ask why you are here. Why do you exist? Is there anything you would like to happen in the future because you are alive today? An orphanage founded? A university funded? A book written to inspire future generations? Find what you are good at and what you enjoy and lean into it. Focus on finding new ways to monetize your hobbies so you can turn them into a full-time focus. Having a purpose will help you overcome any victim mentality.


Dreams are More 

Remember, your dreams are more than just great ideas. They are tied to your purpose and are the fuel you need to propel you through life's challenges. Also, be careful you do not become a slave to your dream, leaving one master of victimhood and falling into the service of another. Your goals are there to serve you. To help keep this in mind, acknowledge the purpose of the dream is to get you to leave the safety and comfort of where you are to risk the journey. And the journey is not about the destination but about who you become along the way. A majority of living is not what happens on the outside but what happens and who we become on the inside. Outside our minds, we have limitations; inside our minds, there is infinite possibility and growth. Focus on winning inside and allow the fruit of your labor to manifest on the outside. 


Boundaries Are the Power To Say No

Underestimate the power of boundaries at your peril. Emotional boundaries in your mind help limit negative thoughts and behaviors, enabling you to think more clearly and behave consistently with your goals. Boundaries with others allow you to protect yourself from destructive behaviors and relationships. 

Remember, fear of losing the relationship prevents you from setting good boundaries, so you must love and respect yourself enough to let go of any person unwilling to respect your limits. If they do not respect your boundaries, they do not respect you. They may challenge your limitations, and that is a good thing. You might even decide to change them because of those challenges, but anyone who appreciates your limits after open discourse is a person who respects you. 


Remember first to deflect when a hostile person confronts you. Throw off their balance and make them question if they are directing their anger towards the right person. Then, follow up with questions or statements that help you dissect what the problem is and discover if you are, in fact, responsible. Lastly, determine what you can do to set boundaries and solve the problem together. 

Boundaries give you power! 


Have a Schedule

Part of setting boundaries for yourself is having a schedule. When chaos flings your world out of control, having a daily order to fall back on will make the healing process much more meaningful. You cannot control your Ex, you cannot control the court system, the judges, who is spending time with your kids when they are with their mom, but you can participate in things you can control. 

There is an excellent concept in time management from productivity consultant, Brian Tracy, called the Eat The Frog Method. There are a lot of psychological benefits from the method that happens behind the scenes, but the gist is to identify a critical task for the day and do it first. That's it. When you feel overwhelmed by emotion and all the things you have to get done, focus on the most critical task, and when you wake up, take all of the energy you can muster and get it done. This process allows you to experience the accomplishment of finishing something meaningful while helping you get things done, especially when you don't care or feel you don't have the energy to do so.



Gratitude As a Weapon

A powerful tool is available for you when you are overwhelmed with pain or anxiety: gratitude. Being grateful for the things and people in your life contributing to your well-being will allow you to put your trials into a universal perspective. While horrifying, what you are experiencing is only in this moment. Focusing on a collective of awesome people and things can help us put our current situation into perspective. Divorce is a season, and though it may take a while, what you are going through will eventually pass. 

Forgiveness 

One of the hardest things you can do is to forgive someone who has done grievous harm. Forgiving such people is divine and cannot be accomplished without significant spiritual support on an ongoing basis. Allow the love and grace shown to you by God and others to flow through you. Open yourself up to being a conduit of that love and allow it to give you the strength to forgive. Again, it does not mean you forget. You never forget, and you do not have to embrace your offender with open arms, though I have seen that. But, you do need to cut any chords that bind you to the person who has harmed you. 


Seek Wholeness and Harmony

As you stumble into this new season, take stock of the areas that impact you the most. Which ones are breaking, and which ones are strong? Is there anything you can do to change the nature of your spokes and pillars? Can you get counseling to help you deal emotionally with the devastation? Can you sharpen your mind by learning new skills or languages, discovering new dreams, or finding your purpose? Can you see anyone in your life from your past that you can forgive so they no longer have power over you? Many tools are at your disposal to move you toward wholeness and harmony. Remember, the most extraordinary power of all is available for you to heal through the sacrifice of Christ on the cross and your ability to tap into the power of the divine. Let it flow through and heal every part of your life. Like cement, it will go into all the cracks and crevices and create new muscles and sinews that make a more robust, bolder, confident, and joyful person.


Wait Upon the Lord

"But they that wait upon the Lord will renew their strength; they will run and not grow weary, they will walk and not be tired." Isaiah 40:31

When you enact change with all your might and give every ounce of yourself, surrender the results to God. The power of your efforts, combined with eternal love, conquers all. Regardless of the outcome, you will win. Irrespective of the slander, you will rise. Despite every effort of your enemies, you will soar above them because your heart, mind, and spirit are free. 

There was a man named Silviu Craciunas, a Romanian author who grew up under Soviet Socialist rule. After rescuing hundreds of people and helping them escape into the West, he was captured and forced to endure endless torture and imprisonment. Day after day, they forced him to stand. He could not lie down or sleep. Or he would be made to walk in circles for hours until his feet bled and he vomited what little food he had left in him. 

Through all of his torment, his excellent form of escape was the freedom he had in his mind. No matter what his enemies did to him, they could not bend or break his will. His mind was free to explore the infinite vastness of imagination. He was physically a captive, but his mind was free. He would eventually escape the prison, flee Romania, and write his book about the affair, sharing with the world how we can also be free if we do not surrender our minds to defeat. 

I am grateful you took this journey with me, and I hope and pray you find peace. I speak life over you and your children. I break any chains that bind you to your past and declare freedom and healing over you. May you find strength and courage to press on and fight the good fight. You are worth the effort, and the world needs the person you will become due to your struggles! You can have your After Happily Ever After, and it will be glorious! 


Now, go out there and redeem your story!

