
CHAPTER ONE
“OUCH”


"Life is pain, Highness. Anyone who says differently
 is selling something." - Wesley, The Princess Bride.

“Life is pain, highness.” That line hit me harder than ever on the day everything changed. My life’s work, travels, accolades—all seemed distant compared to the raw, emotional struggle I was facing.

My Life’s Experience

I've been a filmmaker and writer my entire professional career, but it wasn't always so. I started my undergraduate work in Cross-Cultural Anthropology and Medicine. Still, when I chose an elective in my sister's TV Production class, my world was forever changed. 
I immediately switched my major to Film Directing. Since then, I have worked with some of the biggest names in music and the biggest brands on the planet and won my first Emmy for my team's work on The Dave Ramsey Show. My for-profit and non-profit projects have taken me to over 40 countries and given me a beautiful and comprehensive picture of humanity. 

I have been humbled by the ability of those who, to Western eyes, have the least but yet seize the greatest joy from life. The centuries of hardship endured by the resilient Ukrainian people have reminded me of the depth and breadth of humanity’s ability to overcome obstacles. I learned the true power of family and what real celebration means from my friends in Chili, Ecuador, Mexico, Costa Rica, and Peru. Despite our differences, I noticed one major thing while I was abroad. We have far more in common than we have in contrast. We love our families, music, singing, dancing, food, celebration, life, and the opportunity to give a better future to our children.

	In my travels around the world, I've been shown the depth of humanity's capacity to survive, whatever the obstacle, however pervasive or perverse the oppression or destructive the disaster - whether natural or artificial - and that there is in our shared DNA a compulsion to overcome. I'm reminded of the salmon in the Pacific Northwest that, every year and against all odds, swim upriver, up waterfalls, through every conceivable danger and obstruction, to reach their goal. 

Our advantage is that along our journey, we can take the time to enjoy a sunset, the familiar scent of the breeze, the cool of the evening, and the surge of the sea and celebrate those moments of our oneness with music, dance, feasting, and family - not only those joined to us by blood - but those joined to us by the fact that we share life. As well, we mourn together. We feel one another's pain, comfort each other in times of loss, and even share in hardships that we have no fundamental part in for no other reason but love. That’s remarkable.

At the heart of all these similarities lie universal truths that transcend space, culture, and time. They are ageless and built into the very fabric of life, proving there is more that unites us than divides us. 

I have approached this story with much fear and trembling. I am not a psychologist or a doctor of any humanities, but I am a student of life and have gleaned much from the past and present. I am an avid reader, a historian, and a purveyor of stories. I am bringing you what I have learned through my experience, which has helped me thrive through the challenges, hoping that you will also find freedom from despair. And the lessons you are learning now will enrich your life and your family's for generations to come. 


How to Read This Book

As you will discover, I have divided this book into chapters, each chapter relating to my experiences, the thoughts they engendered, and the actions I took as a result. You can read through the entire book or parse out sections, paragraphs, and even sentences that resonate with you and memorize them as you would a proverb or axiom if it's helpful to you at the moment where you are.  Let's get into this!


The Night Everything Changed

"You mean you'll put down your rock, and I'll put down my sword, and we'll try and kill each other like civilized people?" - Wesley, The Princess Bride.

Not so long ago, I looked out the window of my silver three-series BMW. I've always been fascinated by cars, and it was one of my life's goals to own a BMW by the time I was thirty. But here I was driving the sleek, leather-heat-seated, v6-speed machine, and I didn't care, not one bit. It was the furthest thing from my mind as I eased the car into the parking lot of a Jack-In-The-Box. My stomach was knotted and grumbling. I felt like I was going to throw up. I wasn't hungry. I was devastated. My life and world had toppled into one of my worst nightmares in three short weeks. My fears chanted, "I told you so!" in the deepest corners of my mind…

The thought passed as quickly as it came with a new wave of tears. I was sitting in my car, struggling to smile as I wiped my eyes and stole a glance in the rearview mirror. It revealed the peaceful slumber of one of God's greatest gifts to me . . . my daughter. There aren't enough words to describe my emotions when I think about her. Her head was leaning against the side of the car seat. Her tiny little head . . . 

 I pulled the car into a vacant parking spot beside a white Audi. I say this because I had bought that car, too, and what was once something that excited me had turned into something that made me tense and left my knees weak. I looked at the woman driving the car; I knew who she was. I had a child with this woman, yet at that moment, I realized I didn’t know her anymore. I felt invisible.

Her blonde hair, now brown, fell down her back in waves. Her green hazel eyes danced happily. I hadn't seen them do that in some time. She opened the door and stepped out. I opened my door and went to hug her, but her arms stayed fixed to her side as though bound by some unseen force holding them tight. I couldn't understand what I had done. 

She swiftly turned her attention to my daughter, who was now awake. My little girl stretched and smiled widely. "Mommy!" She was eager to see her. Kinasha put her in her car. 
	"Did you have fun with Daddy?" 

I couldn't take any more. I was completely ignored. It was the first time I understood that I didn't matter to my Ex. 
I left without a word, without even saying goodbye to my daughter. I didn't look back. I was so broken and profoundly torn that I felt walls were closing around me, and I was fighting to breathe. 

It started to rain even as I pulled out of the parking lot. It was as though heaven was weeping with me. Yet, amid all the thunder and fury, from some peaceful place far above and beyond it, came the words "I love you." 

It was God's voice, but my crying was too loud, and the rain was too heavy to listen. The engine roared as I sped into the storm.


It’s Like Finding Out the Person You Love 
Died Every Day

That was just one of many hard nights. Realizing that I was less than a stranger to the woman I had loved, that all the life we'd shared for ten years meant nothing – had vanished like a vapor trail – left me feeling empty, like the subject of some cruel joke, and everyone but I was laughing. There were nights when I couldn’t even go up to our bedroom. It was empty and hurt too severely, so I slept on the couch and cried myself to sleep. Being a man is sometimes very lonely, especially in times like these. Most people aren’t concerned with how you feel; if you are hurt, you must take care of that quickly! “Deal with it,” so to speak… I know. It’s not fair. But there is an answer, and we’ll talk about that in a later chapter. 

I remember this like it was yesterday, and it hurt, just the way you’re hurting now, and I am sorry you have to go through something so painful. I’m sure you already know or maybe discovered it, no matter how hard you try; there is no escaping it. There’s nowhere to go but forward. You have to face the pain if you’re going to begin to heal. Go ahead, turn off the lights, and see if that helps. It’s still there. Drink yourself stupid and wake up. Do you feel any better? You can’t self-medicate this reality away. You can shrug off the pain, get a new woman, get lost in work, move to a new city, and start over, but unless you deal with the trauma that has been done to you, you will never fully heal and, given the right trigger, all the baggage you carry, you will dump on some poor unsuspecting new girl. You will project your previous experiences on her, and any trigger she might exhibit will set you off. And unless she’s wise enough to recognize your wounds and tell you, “That’s not mine,” you will be doomed to repeat the process. 

So, yes, these are your darkest days, and the cruel irony is that this is when you must make the most critical and complex decisions for your future and be present. You can't check out. You have to go through this. You have to face your pain, and you have to heal. I know, it's as though you found out someone you love died, but in addition to being dead, you find out they rejected you, too. But unlike death, you wake up the next day and find out they died all over again. It's your own personal Ground Hog Day. Those are the darkest times, but every decision you make for yourself matters in these moments. There is good news, however. It comes through newfound self-awareness, redefined goals, a clearer vision, physical exertion, and the rediscovery of deep-seated dreams.



You Have Power, and It’s Time To Take It Back!

The first step you can take on your road to recovery is acknowledging this pain will eventually subside. It WILL eventually end. I often think this when waiting for my wife (I am happily remarried) to come out of Hobby Lobby. There's some crazy time warp that happens once she goes through those doors, but I know she’ll come out eventually, and I’ll get home. Whenever I get impatient, I visualize it, knowing it will happen. That's a simplistic example, but starting with something small helps you tackle the more significant challenges. Visualizing your future healing—picturing a day when you are happy and that dagger in your back is gone—can and will give you the strength to endure, even when your nights seem the longest. 

The next step is to separate any value and self-worth you derived from the relationship and refocus on discovering who you are on your own. Easier said than done, right? I will show you how I did it in the following chapters as we dive into topics such as prioritizing your physical, mental, spiritual, and emotional well-being, setting boundaries, and re-centering your focus on personal goals. 

This is what I mean by taking your power back. It's not taking it from someone else—it’s reclaiming it from where it doesn’t belong and putting it back into your own hands. External control is an illusion.

 True empowerment comes from within, and it’s a two-step process. First, recognize your autonomy and agency, and take responsibility for your role in any situation. The power your hurt has over you diminishes as you learn to move the weight of your self-worth from someone else’s hands into your own. Second, surrender to a greater understanding of your worth in the eyes of God. This shift removes the burden of value from fleeting emotions or circumstances and places it on the foundation of an eternal, unchanging truth. The beauty of this is that your self-worth remains steady, no matter what happens. In other words, we surrender to a higher purpose, anchoring our self-worth on something solid and everlasting. 

When we place that much of our value and self-worth in someone else's hands, we are setting ourselves up to fall, and if we are being honest with ourselves, we're setting them up to fail, too. People cannot make you happy; you can feel satisfied with them, but the happiness must come from inside you. 

Looking back, I realize I had pinned a significant portion of my self-worth on Kinasha. When she ultimately decided I wasn't what she was looking for, her departure hit me hard. In retrospect, I see that I had lost sight of my emotional autonomy and leaned too heavily on someone who couldn't fully support me. This was a crucial mistake. By believing that Kinasha would make me happy or that my value and worth came from my ability to make her happy, I had built our relationship on a false foundation. I had ceded my power to her and succumbed to an illusion.
	
So, now that we’ve established this, it hurts like hell. Where do you go from here? How do we go from broken, sobbing into our pillows, or hitting trees with baseball bats to starting a new life, forming better relationships with our children, and eventually developing a successful relationship with someone new? 

The truth is—you don’t. Not unless you accomplish five significant things first: 

Establish a new identity independent of your relationship.
Set new goals for yourself. 
To achieve these goals, think, plan, and focus on them.
Take deliberate actions to align your life with your dreams. 
Step confidently into the next phase of your life when the opportunity arises. 

Imagine this: Three men walk into a room with three doors, one on each wall. On the first door, there is a sign that reads “Can’t.” On the second door, the sign says, “Might." On the third door, the sign reads, "Can." Here’s the twist: the room is magical, and each man could only see one door. The door he sees depends entirely on his mindset and self-perception. And it’s at that door—the one he believes in—that he spends all of his time and energy. 

	This is why we need to strip away negative thought patterns and beliefs. To change our lives, we must form a new, balanced, focused, and free identity. We must create new plans and goals, take actionable steps, and move forward intentionally.

Applying these principles, not just talking about them, might also have the added benefit of healing a relationship on the verge of collapse or even restoring a broken home. While there’s no guarantee, there are few things more attractive to a woman than a man actively pursuing a worthwhile goal with confidence and persistence, grounded in his sense of value and self-worth. While it may not guarantee you’ll fix a fractured home, it will lead you toward a happy, healthy future.


Make The Pain Work For You

Pain is a powerful tool that pushes us to change. While it may be unwelcome, it’s an inevitable part of life, which is why I quoted The Princess Bride at the beginning of this chapter: "Life is pain." We know pain is coming. It's not a matter of if but when. Yet, this can work to our advantage. Since we know the pain will arrive, we can prepare for it by recognizing its potential benefits and using them to make us better people. In our brokenness, we have the most extraordinary opportunity for growth. When the walls are torn down, the gates are destroyed, and we stand naked and vulnerable before the world, we’re forced to confront what we’ve hidden or ignored—and work to improve those areas. 

I call it Life's Gym. When you go to the gym, your muscles must tear in order to grow. You have to endure those micro-tears to see results. It hurts, but without the pain, you’ll never reach your goals. In Life's Gym, however, you don't get to choose when you work out. Life decides for you. One day, it's time to learn patience and BLAM!—Lesson time. 

During my season in Life's Gym, I learned invaluable lessons: true humility, forgiveness, boundaries, and self-worth based on my determined values—unconditional love, surrender, and wisdom. And that’s just scratching the surface. These lessons are a core part of the man I’ve become, and while I wouldn’t want to relive those painful moments, I wouldn’t trade them either. The growth has been too significant.

This life has so much to offer you. Even in your most painful seasons, it’s calling you to dig deeper, to discover what lies beyond the surface of your personality, a richer, fuller, and more meaningful life. Pain is a part of that journey, and the first step toward healing is embracing it. You can't change what happened to you, no matter who’s to blame, but you can make it work for your good.  

We’ll talk more about pain in Chapter Seven. Hooooray!




Never After Nine

Shortly after my wife left, I made a pact with myself: I would not deal with my emotions or make any decisions after 9 p.m. I found I never made good decisions when tired, and my feelings always got the better of me. The choice wasn’t magical; it was practical. When overwhelmed, I checked the clock, and if it were past 9, I’d tell myself, “No more tonight. I’ll handle it in the morning.” 

It was like clocking out from work—no matter what happened at the office, I didn’t take it home. This approach reminded me of two things: I control my emotions, and my feelings don’t have to dictate my choices. It was essential in gaining perspective and creating a buffer when I could take a break. I often played Call of Duty, watched comedies, prayed, wrote in my journal, or called any of my friends who were still up that late. 

There was also late-night basketball at the courts near my house. I felt overwhelmed; I’d strap on my sneakers and head to the court. Physical exercise is an excellent way to manage pent-up aggression and negative energy. It provided a break from the situation, giving me a clear view and helping me plan how to handle it. I strongly recommend embracing physical activity. Your heart, body, and mind will thank you. 

Additionally, set aside a space just for yourself where you can think—somewhere away from reminders of your relationship. A new environment can offer temporary peace and help you escape your suffering. Creating positive memories and associations outside your relationship is crucial. These will be places that help ground you when you are overwhelmed. Choose a place that brings you peace- a new cafe, a church, or a quiet stream. You will know when you find it. 


The Long Haul

Understand that what you are going through isn’t a sprint; it’s a marathon. You can’t simply hop, skip, and jump through the pain and expect to come out unscathed on the other side. This book is designed to help you build the tools you need to persevere through the challenges ahead—whether it’s financial loss, custody battles, or character assassination. 

Your Kinasha and their attorney likely try to make you appear as unfit and undesirable as possible. They must do this to justify their departure, gain custody, or secure a larger alimony payment. Yes, in most states, the system is against you. It’s unfair and unjust and will challenge you to the core. There will be times when you lose faith in yourself and humanity. 

But remember, you can overcome this. I am living proof that it’s possible! Steady yourself like a giant stone in the path of a tsunami headed toward your kids. Prepare to fight—emotionally, spiritually, physically, and mentally—taking your healing one step at a time. Each step is a victory step. There will be days when it feels like you’re taking one step forward and ten steps back, but don’t give up. Your future is worth fighting for. Your children, future spouse, job, future kids, and future self are all rooting for you to succeed.

As my father used to say, “The only way to eat an elephant is one bite at a time,” or as my mother would remind me, “To eat an entire field of grass, cows must keep their heads down and chew.”We have a lot ahead of us, so get ready to keep your head down and move forward. 
.


Food For Thought: 

Have you ever learned from pain? 

If so, was the lesson helpful? I once learned a painful lesson as a kid when I fell from a twenty-foot tree house. My cousin and I were hiding on the top level of the fort, and I hadn’t realized how close I was to the edge. I rolled over, thinking I had more room, bounced off the second story, and landed inches from a pile of old boards and nails with a thud in the soft mud. That fall was painful, but it taught me to be more mindful of my surroundings and kept me safe.

How can the pain you are experiencing serve you now?

 As I write this book, I grapple with delayed gratification in pursuing a lifelong dream. It has been excruciating and difficult to stay focused and not give up. Proverbs 13:12 says, “Hope deferred makes the heart grow sick.” It’s a fitting verse. Yet, I’ve found new ways to overcome discouragement and improve my skills. I’ve become a better writer, learned about AI and digital production, expanded my network, and built resilience. These efforts have helped me stay grounded and clear-headed under pressure. 


What will that pain look like a year from now? Five Years? Ten Years? 

Like storm clouds, your pain will eventually fade, leaving behind the lasting results of your efforts. You can significantly benefit if you focus on improving what’s within your control. Neglecting deeper concerns might lessen the pain temporarily, but unresolved issues could linger, causing further harm and hindering your progress toward a healthy relationship. Embrace the healing journey. 


Are you determined to heal and to the extent you can take control of your life?

In a Biblical account, Jesus encountered a crippled man who begged to be healed. Jesus asked the man if he wanted to be healed—a question that seemed odd at first. Of course, he wanted to be healed; who wouldn’t? Yet. Life has shown me that some people find comfort in their pain, seeking sympathy rather than healing. It’s a logical question: Do you genuinely want to heal?


What would it mean to you if you knew that everything, even your current situation, works for your good?

Despite my life falling apart and losing almost everything, I experienced a heroic turnaround. I gained primary custody of my daughter, cleared my debts, received unexpected mailbox money from strangers, and married an incredible woman. Your story will be different, but cultivating qualities like love, forgiveness, humility, and determination will produce positive results. 


What lessons can you learn from this?

Fear no longer defined my boundaries. I learned to say no, even at the risk of anger or loss. Understanding codependency helped me heal self-blame and embrace compassion. I used to overanalyze every action and blame myself, even when others were at fault. My fatherhood grew wiser as I helped my daughter recognize manipulative guilt through a playful game. Solitude became a cherished time for self-discovery. These glimpses of transformation are just the beginning. Pain reveals the hidden areas in your life, offering opportunities for growth. Embrace the journey, each step bringing you closer to a future of freedom and healthy relationships.
