



CHAPTER SIX
BOUNDARIES = POWER



Ten Things I Love About Me 

Take a piece of paper or get your laptop and write down the top ten most important things when considering how you want others to treat you. There is no right or wrong answer here; your answers can change when they aren't working for you. It can be as simple as "They need to encourage and build me up instead of tearing me down." "I need people to listen and not interrupt when sharing my feelings." Or, "I need to be left alone when I am angry so I can calm down before I speak." 

After you have written those things, put your pen down and walk away. Take a minute to think about how the people in your current relationships are treating you or how they have treated you in the past. How many of those top ten things did your partner violate, and how many did you allow because you refused to stand up for them or because you failed to communicate they were essential to you and just expected the other person to know? 

Chances are you are discovering that your boundaries are being obliterated. It's one of the primary reasons you feel unloved, disrespected, and abused. These are expectations you can use to establish boundaries. Once you understand them and express them clearly, begin enforcing them immediately. 

My modification's next step to this exercise is to write down five consequences. What are five things you can do if the other person refuses to respect your newly expressed expectations? The consequences for violating boundaries need to be increasing in severity. To be diplomatic and increase the likelihood of being heard, you should follow the "ask them, tell them, punch them" model. I heard about this model as a kid from my dad when I was dealing with bullies:

It would be best to ask them to stop whatever action they are doing unless it will cause immediate injury, then skip to the last part. Asking them is a way to appeal to their sense of self-respect and dignity.

If the other individual(s) refuses to stop, you demand they stop. It is a command with a threat of step three in the tone. You are making the other person aware they are approaching a consequence they’re likely to regret.

The nuclear option: diplomacy won't work, and the individuals violating your boundaries have refused to respect you, then push the red button.

Hopefully, as adults, it will not come to blows, but there needs to be a nuclear option, usually and most effectively in the form of, "I'm leaving.": leaving the room, leaving the conversation, leaving the relationship. "If you cannot stop yelling at me and talk to me respectfully, I’ll (consequence).” This will be the place to interject one of the five consequences you wrote down and apply them accordingly.

This method of boundary setting is best used when the individual is most likely to be hostile. But you should be more diplomatic in your approach. In my most recent and lasting relationships, I handle disagreements by asking a question to which their answer will likely be “yes”. Then, I followed the question by offering a solution to the question I just asked. It helps to get both of us on the same page.

You want me to hear what you are saying and to understand, correct? To which they will likely reply. "That's right.”

Then, the best way for me to really hear what you are saying is for you to stay calm and not shout. When you yell, it destroys any desire I have to understand. I'm just pissed. Is that what you want? “No.”

I get that you’re (angry, unhappy, hurt, etc.), but if you want me to understand what you are saying, we need to learn to communicate in a way that’s less emotional.  

The first question is used to get you both on the same page. It reminds her that you’re both in the boat together and have to pull in the same direction if you hope to get safely to shore; otherwise, you’ll only be rowing in circles, and if you do that too long, it escalates to the point you’ve created a whirlpool that sucks you both down. 

	Stepping back from the emotions of the moment allows you to establish a goal to work toward together, that is, “the something” that you both want. It becomes a lighthouse leading you through the storm. 

	As a young man, I grew up on the coast of Maine, and my family lived in a house on the ocean. We also had a small boat with an outboard motor, and my friends and I would take the boat on Friday afternoons when school got out. Then, we would head out to the surrounding islands to camp and live off the land. We’d return Sunday night before dinner, shower, and hit the sack. On one occasion, we selected an island about three or four miles out, set up camp, and fell asleep. In the middle of the night, I woke up with extreme pain in my right eye. When I reached up to touch it, I found a large spider, and it had somehow bitten my eyeball. It swelled immediately and was gushing water. 

	I told my friends what happened, told them I’d be back to get them in the morning, took the boat, and headed the four miles back to shore. (I know. I should have had someone come with me.) The problem was, that it was pitch black that night, no moon, no stars. To top that off, the sea was wild, the wind was whipping, and water was coming into the boat. With one eye swollen shut and intense pain, I pressed on into what I thought was the direction of home. 

To make matters worse, I ran out of gas, too, and filled it up with what I had left in the can. I was lost, in pain, and in danger of getting swamped when I rounded a small island, and there, in the distance, was the shore, and on the shore, one small light shining brightly from a window. I turned the boat and headed toward the beacon. A while later, I made it to shore, and the light turned out to be one my mom had left on in the kitchen. My mom always turned off all the lights, but that night, she had been mopping and backed herself out of the room. With the floor wet, she couldn’t get back to turn off the light. 

	That had been my salvation. That one small guide led me out of certain calamity. Despite everything, I was able to persevere and make it home. When you and your spouse can identify a common goal you both want, and you work toward it, you can get through the storm. If she has already left and you are picking up the pieces, that small beacon will be the purpose you set for yourself back in chapter three. 

The second question is to let her know how best to communicate with you, and you’ve already established that’s not by yelling. "But I'm not yelling!" She might say. And to that, I reply: “It seems like it to me. I feel like I’m being attacked. If you want me to understand, please try it another way. Think about what you want me to understand and express it in a way I can appreciate.” For me, my wife Rei has learned to use humor. I respond very well when she shows she respects me and then uses parody or exaggeration to point out the absurdity of my thinking. It’s quite comical, lowers my defenses, and allows me to see things from her point of view. I can still disagree with her, but at least I have heard her, and I can make a good-faith effort to address the problem. 

The third question acknowledges her feelings. You respect and appreciate the fact she’s angry without necessarily agreeing that her anger is justified. Then, appeal to your shared goal of understanding each other to resolve the disagreement. 

In this, you will have set boundaries without getting angry, without agreeing to the cause, and without attacking her and putting her on the defensive. By appealing to her for help understanding her point of view, you’ve put you both on the same team, working together to solve the problem instead of trying to declare who’s right and wrong. 

In such situations, I imagine the two of us against the world, back to back, swords drawn, leaning against each other, each defending the other against whatever might try to tear us apart. My goal in any boundary setting is to get us working together to establish mutual respect boundaries while simultaneously solving our problems. In the end, If the other person refuses to cooperate. Nuke them.


The Justifiably Angry Producer

I was working as the Assistant Director on a feature film. We had been shooting for about three weeks, which was very hectic. There were a lot of things that needed to be improved. For one, the rangers of the park we were shooting in told us we could exercise a lot of freedom in the park. We planned our entire shoot based on being able to hike off the trails and hit the locations we had previously scouted. On the day we showed up to shoot, a new park ranger arrived and informed us the previous ranger we had been working with had been fired, and we would now be working with her. According to her rules, we would not be allowed to shoot off of the trails, we would not be allowed to use our guns, and we would have to finish shooting every day by five o'clock. That was brutal. Months of planning and tens of thousands of dollars lost. No matter how my director argued with her, she refused to budge and threatened to cancel our shoot. Our producer was furious. 

Compounding the problem, the smoke bombs we used to create fog (stupid idea, I know) were much more robust than we had been told and, while wonderfully effective on screen, had the adverse effect of appearing like a forest fire. You can imagine our producer's disappointment when the helicopters arrived, along with a dozen firefighters and additional park rangers. These were not our finest moments and very uncharacteristic of our organization, but at this point, we were winging it to hold everything together. 

Two days later, I was in my room when a thunderous pounding came on our hotel door. When I opened the door, the producer came barging in. He was furious. His eyes were on fire, and he was looking for blood. He started screaming at me about what I knew and how much I had allowed. I didn't know what he was talking about. He continued his attack, accusing me of being unprofessional and endangering his career. 

At this point, I realized this had nothing to do with me. The producer was angry and worried. He was looking for answers, and I was the closest target to vent his frustration. Plus, I was the AD. I could have attacked him back, expressed outrage at him bursting into our room unprovoked, or screamed at him for the unfounded accusations. I knew it wasn't about me; it was about the world that had seemed to suddenly stacked up against him. 

So, I chose to ignore everything he said about me; it was irrelevant, and instead, I focused on what he wanted. I started with what I knew. He had a horrible week, was way over budget, our production was in danger of derailment, and his job was on the line. I determined he needed to vent and someone to appreciate everything he was doing to make this production successful despite the setbacks. So, I decided to join him in his tirade instead of opposing him. 

I led with. 

"I'm so glad I'm not a producer." He was shocked. He stopped yelling. "Being a producer sucks. It's hard, and no one appreciates what you go through." 
"That's right."
"I'd be pissed too. You had the rangers almost canceling our shoot, the crappy issue with the smoke bombs, that was our bad idea, and then the budget isn't enough to do this well, and it's such an important project."
"It is. And the bosses don't understand what we're dealing with."
"How could they? They're not down here solving all of these problems? You're doing an excellent job, and I know that despite our setbacks, we have a fantastic team, and under your leadership, we will give them a tremendous movie."
"We are doing a good job. We've overcome a lot, and it is looking great."
"It is! Did you see all those amazing shots we got yesterday? Which was your favorite?"

The conversation continued until we laughed about some crazy things that had already happened. I assured our heroic producer we were on track. Once I was confident he had been attended to and significantly vented, I brought up his earlier complaint because I didn't know what he was talking about. He mentioned he had heard some of the actors had jumped off a waterfall after he had told them not to. They had jumped off a waterfall, but not the sixty-five-foot waterfall he was afraid they had, but rather, a five-foot fall into a warm spring. He left laughing and even hugged me; when the door closed, my roommate looked at me and exclaimed. "How did you do that?" A few days later, the producer pulled me aside, apologized for what had happened, and appreciated my understanding. The project was one of their highest-grossing films, and to this day, the producer and I are still excellent friends, having worked on dozens of other projects together.


Consider the Source

I first consider the source when attacked to answer my roommate's question. Does the person challenging me like me or love me genuinely, and do they want what's best for me? If the answer is yes, then I must consider that, in some way, their behavior toward me is an attempt to either help me, connect with me, or express frustration over how I have failed to communicate with them. It is easier to remain calm and listen when I understand they ultimately want what's best for me, even if the way they are going about it is failing. If I believe they love me, I will take their words to heart and consider how to apply their advice. I will find ways to enforce my boundaries more diplomatically.

However, suppose the person attacking me doesn't know or care about me. In that case, I disregard entirely anything they are saying about me. Instead, I focus on what they are trying to get from me. Is it a reasonable expectation? If I determine that it is, or might be, I have to be willing to surrender the point and adjust my boundaries accordingly. Secondly, consider if there is something that I need from them and decide whether to negotiate the point. If I genuinely believe (not feel), that their demands or expectations are unreasonable. I have to let them know that I am willing and prepared to walk away.

At times there is a temptation to say, “But what if some of what they say is true?" Throw it out anyway. It is poison. If you have a bag of chicken and know one piece is poisonous, do you eat the other chicken in the bag? Heck, no! Despite how good the rest of the chicken might be, I don't want to risk eating the contaminated chicken by accident. There are people you know will tell you the truth in love. So you don’t have to accept it from a source who doesn't care about you or is actively trying to hurt you. 

One of the things Kinasha used to say, which got me stuck in a knot, was that no one else understood because they didn't have to live with me. This hurt deeply. It was partly true because she was the only person who lived with me and had to every day, but it was also false because my parents lived with me for eighteen years and my roommates for six and never expressed the same accusations. Additionally, it was a false premise. Were her assumptions and statements about me correct, they would be so only because they were true, not because we lived together. So, I needed to consider the source. At that time, she had already left me and needed a reason to justify leaving, so her intentions toward me were not honorable: my thoughts and feelings didn’t merit her words any consideration. 


Deflect/Dissect/Determine

It's hard to be kind when you feel attacked, but when you genuinely focus on understanding other people, you can find solutions to problems that may have otherwise seemed impossible. When a hostile person confronts you, first deflect the incoming attacks by cutting immediately to the heart of what you believe is making them attack you. Throw them off balance and make them consider if their anger is directed toward the right person by directly pointing out the issue and then complimenting them on their ability to handle or deal with the problem so far. Then, follow up with questions or statements that help you dissect what the problem is and discover if you are, in fact, responsible. Lastly, as I did with the angry producer, determine what you can do to set boundaries and solve the problem together. 

I'll give you one more example of the deflect/dissect/determine boundary setting in action. Several months ago, I drove to with my new wife to Burbank in the middle of a three-lane one-way road. I needed to turn into a parking garage and almost missed the entrance, so I pulled a hard left. I heard screeching tires and a horn. A man had pulled into the far left lane behind me, and I had not seen him. He came inches from smashing into my driver's side door. I was angry. He had not been in the lane when I turned and swerved behind me, nearly causing the accident. But he was also furious, and rightfully so; we had almost crashed because I turned into his lane. He got out of the car, ready to throw down. It wasn't hard to determine he did not have my best interest at heart. I could see his carotid artery bulging. Before he could say anything, I immediately thanked him. He froze. 
"Oh, my gosh. Thank you so much. You just saved our lives."
"I did?"
“Yes. We would've crashed if you weren't a good driver. Then I turned to the other people who had witnessed the event and applauded him. 
"That's right." He yelled. "I'm a good driver!"
The other drivers cheered him on. 
"I'm so sorry. Thank you!" 
All I lost was a little pride, and I was able to get to our reservation on time. I deflected the anger, quickly dissected the problem, determined the cause, and determined to downplay my part in the near accident while deflecting the other driver's anger toward me.  
I had set a boundary: I did not want to fight with random strangers before my date with my wife. By defusing the situation, he respected my boundaries without even being confrontational. However, while this approach may work situationally, it only sometimes works in a long-term relationship. For those relationships, the limitations must be firmly and clearly defined and, at times, enforced. 


Roommates Too? Yes!
 
I had a roommate after my wife left. She was a good friend, and we got along well. However, an expectation was developing in her mind that followed the lines of me needing to behave toward her as if I were her boyfriend or husband. She kept asking me to do things for her or argue about where I was going or who I was with. I became upset and took it personally when I remembered my boundaries. Firstly, she wasn't my girlfriend or spouse, so I did not need to tell her anything I did not wish to. Secondly, I didn't want her yelling at me. I'm not a screamer, and it's the surest way to get me to shut down and the most likely way to get precisely the opposite of what you want. 

During a time when she was expressing her feelings, I stopped her. "I'm going to stop you. I love you, but I'm not your boyfriend. I don't have to do that for you. That's your responsibility. And if you continue yelling at me, you’ll have to leave." I left the chat, and she was upset enough about my boundary that she moved out. As I've said before, that is the risk. She might choose to disengage or leave, but I kept my dignity despite her choice. I decided to respect myself and immediately felt a surge of life. 

A piece of the brokenness inside of me healed. Though we were no longer roommates, we remained friends and developed a healthier relationship. Because I had become more aware of my expectations, I could notice more clearly they were being violated and respond. 


Become Confident Enough to Set Boundaries

The second boundary exercise we are going to use is my self-esteem generator. It’s just a list, but it works! Because I had spent the better part of ten years being reminded of my shortcomings, I needed something to accent the positive things about me. So, get out your paper or notebook again, and let's get to work. 

I want you to write the numbers from 1-20 on separate lines. On each line, write one good thing about yourself. It's okay; this may take a while, days even. 

1. I am a good listener. 
2. I can fix almost any car. 
3. I encourage people. 
4. I am generous with my things.
5. I work hard when I am excited about something. 

Whenever you begin to feel bad about yourself or unworthy, or when someone tears you down, go back to this list, read it out loud, and remind yourself that while you might have negative qualities, you also have a significant number of great things which the other person is not choosing to focus on. I use this when someone points out something negative about me. For example, my boss might say, "You are late to work again. You are always late, and it's irresponsible." 

While he might be right about me being late, he is wrong about me being irresponsible. On my list, I have written, "I am a good father and a hard worker." So, I will respond with something like this, "You're right, I was late, and I'm sorry." I addressed the accurate part of his complaint by saying I'm sorry and acknowledging I was late. Then I said, "I never knew being a single dad and a good father was so hard and unpredictable. It might be a flaw, but wanting to do my best no matter what I am doing can put pressure on other areas of my life. I know it's important, so I'll ask my mom if I can get help in the morning to be on time. Do you have any suggestions?" I agreed with his original complaint in this response and expressed why I was late. It was not because I was irresponsible; it was just the opposite. I was late because I was being responsible, just not in the way he wanted at the time. 

I was working hard to be the best single father I could be— a task requiring enormous responsibility. I then expressed I had already been finding ways to cope after office hours but would look for new ways to get help before work so I could arrive on time. Then, I appealed to his sense of importance by valuing his opinion and looking for help. 

This example is one of the ways you can apply the self-esteem generator exercise in real time. It helps us identify valid and or misrepresented words spoken over us. Once we can determine those false things, we can call them out and counter them with facts. It is essential in court when your ex's attorney does everything possible to make you look horrible. Acknowledge the facts and then oppose the lies with the truth. I used this repeatedly during my depositions. 

The Hills We Are Willing To Die On

"That's it! I am not doing this anymore. No more yelling at me. No screaming. No midnight favors. I'm not giving you a reason why I didn't text you immediately. I won't nod and smile while your parents rip my job apart. I don't care if you need another pair of shoes, I'm not buying them because you already have fifty pairs! No more skipping workouts to watch soap operas, No more workouts to watch soap operas; I'm not cooking, cleaning, working, fixing the car, or painting the house. I'm out! OOOOGA OOOOOGA. Abandon ship!

What happens if you suddenly have thousands of new boundaries and try implementing them all at once with little to no tact? While you might be tempted to throw up all of your boundaries simultaneously, doing so may result in catastrophic failure. Unless you are divorced, I suggest a more staggard and diplomatic approach. Easing into your new expectations will enable your spouse, parents, boss, or whomever to adjust to your new rules. 

To begin implementing new boundaries in an existing relationship, start with one or two of your most critical issues. We will call those the "hills you are willing to die on." They are the boundaries for which you are willing to lose the relationship if they are not respected. For example, you have decided you are not okay with your partner screaming at you publicly or belittling you in front of your friends. The next time it happens, wait until you get back to the car, and before you go anywhere, let her know it hurt you when she yelled. I like to start that conversation with questions that help correctly align your relationship to the truth of where it is.
"You love me, right?" You might say.
"Yes." She hopefully responds. 
“I love you too. Which means I genuinely want what’s best for you. Do you want what’s best for me?”
Hopefully, she says: “Yes.”
"I think you do, too. And because of that, I’ll tell you that you hurt me, hurt me enough to make me angry, angry enough to be bitter, and I don't want anger and bitterness to come between us."
"Okay."
"Remember when you did________. I felt like_______. Is that how you wanted me to feel?"
"No." They will usually get defensive and give a reason to explain why they did what they did. Ignore that. Whatever the reason, it was insufficient to justify yelling at you publicly. 
"I understand you're upset; you might even be right, but if you want me to respond to you favorably and hear what you have to say, then wait until we get into the car or until we get home." 
"I'm not yelling. It's not yelling."
"It is, to me. And if you do it again, I love you, but I will walk away. I won't stand there anymore and let you yell at me." 

Whatever relationship you’re involved in - with your wife, your boss, your friend, or co-worker, It’s safe to assume you will get resistance at times like this. 
In most cases, the other person will have a list of reasons to resist your boundaries. Stand firm, and when it becomes necessary, remind her about what she is doing, and if they keep doing it, follow through with your threat and walk away. Whether you are still in a thriving relationship, a dying one, or one that has already kicked the can, establishing boundaries for how you expect to be treated and creating a consequence for violating those expectations will benefit your healing and future success. 

Lastly, remember to employ empathy in all of your boundaries setting. Your aim should be to create or establish healthier interactions and not obliterate the other person. Even in a divorce, if not for your sake, for the sake of your children. Don't be a pushover, but bring peace where possible. 


A Compliment Sandwich - Peace Where Possible

One of the best ways I have discovered to implement change or deliver potentially harmful news more digestibly is to use a compliment sandwich. I apply the principle in my relationships with my wife and kids, on set when working with my actors or crew, and use them when teaching.

I don't recall where I first heard about the compliment sandwich, but regardless, it works, and I've used it to significant effect. The premise is just like it sounds—compliment, correction, compliment. I will let the person I am addressing know I appreciate and value them, or I might acknowledge something they achieved. Then, I will offer a correction or inform them of a choice I am making that they may not like. Then, I will follow the discipline with another compliment, for example. My daughter works very hard in school and has a good attitude. However, this week, she was in a horrible mood and was being disrespectful to her mother and me. I want her to understand my new boundary. I will not be spoken to disrespectfully, regardless of her emotions. 
It might go something like this: 

"I appreciate how hard you work in school and how dedicated you are to doing your best. It makes being your parent very exciting and enjoyable. (Compliment) However, this last week, something has been very off. You talked back to your mom; you've been snippy with me which is not like you; and it’s not okay. (Correction) I know you are usually very good at sharing your feelings when something bothers you, so I'm sure you will let me know what is going on so we can help. (Compliment)." That is a receipt that can open the door for meaningful dialogue and help my daughter course correct while maintaining peace. Positive behavior and firm expectations take time, but consistent encouragement will yield results.

What about with my Ex? What if we hate each other? Even if you hate someone or don't get along, it can be more effective than a verbal assault or name-calling. Here's an example of how I used this process to renegotiate custody when I moved to California without the need to go back to court. 

We were living in Tennessee; Kinasha had moved out of state, and my daughter and I had remained. I was offered a job in California and knew I had to take it. However, according to Tennessee law, Kinasha would have to agree with the move. We had a horrible custody battle the first time, and neither of us wanted to go through it again. Here's how it went:

"We've both been through a lot and considering the horrible situation we went through with the custody; we did an outstanding job focusing on our daughter. She's doing so well. Given all that, I have been offered a job in California, and we need to move. I know you will oppose this, but instead of going to court, let's take what we learned from before and work on something together. Let's assume our daughter ends up with you in your state. What will that look like? What school would she go to? How would you care for her? And who would pay for what? I will do the same thing for California. Let's look at both situations, without deciding which one we should do, and decide together the best situation for each location. Once we have done that together, we can debate which will be best, so regardless of who "wins," we both know she will be okay. I'm confident if we focus on her, we will come up with what is best for her, and we can do it without spending a fortune in court." She agreed. We worked out both scenarios, found the best schools in the area, and put down all the pros and cons of both places. Then, we argued our cases and came to a final agreement. 

Despite our agreement, I suggested we present our solutions to our now teenage daughter for her to decide, without animosity or pressure from us, which she would prefer. She chose to go with her mom, and while it hurt horribly, it ended up being best for her. She graduated top of her class and got a whole ride to an incredible school, plus she's a phenomenal human being! 

I wasn't able to do this because we got along so well. I could do this because I had done the healing work I've been discussing in this book. I overcame the horrific divorce and abandonment challenge by resisting bitterness, choosing to forgive, setting good boundaries, and putting the focus on our daughter. 

Striving to make choices that lead to life starts with developing good boundaries. 


Boundaries Create Momentum and Power

One of the things that will become incredibly clear while establishing boundaries will be the surge of energy you feel when you begin to see results manifest in your life. You will start to be treated like you want to be treated, and those who refuse to honor and respect you will self-eliminate, leaving you free from the baggage of potentially toxic relationships. 
The more you practice, the better you will get and the sooner you will be able to recognize actions or comments that create negative energy and harm. Enjoy the victory and the surge of self-confidence that comes from respecting yourself, and then turn that energy back toward your new goals and vision. It will be a catalyst to create momentum. 

I turned it into physical energy first. As I began to feel more confident, I wanted the outside to match the inside. I started working out three to four times a week, cutting a lot of the garbage I was eating out of my diet. I also focused on standing up straighter. The physicality of walking into a room with my shoulder back and head up impacted me psychologically. I began to believe what I hoped to achieve was possible, and in turn, it gave me the energy to get up and do it. I got a new full-time position as the director of post-production for a film house. I wrote a book and several scripts and started sharing my story. 

The greatest freedom came when I realized I no longer looked outside myself for affirmation and value. It didn’t matter what anyone else thought. I was doing this. I would be healed and pursue my goals with everything in me. “I” was enough for me, and that was all I needed to kick myself out of the rut my divorce had left me in. That and a lot of prayer. (I am only expressing the part of healing that depended on me.)

I’m excited to hear about your results. I can’t wait to see what happens when you commit to creating and lovingly enforcing good boundaries that lead to life for you, your family, and your future relationships. 


Food For Thought

Boundaries are essential in personal growth and relationships. What are your top ten most important boundaries? How can you work to implement these expectations at work, at home, with your parents, and with friends? 

If people continually violate your boundaries and disregard your desires, then there is a strong chance you are or have been in an abusive relationship. What steps can you take to create positive barriers that enforce how you want to be treated? 

A lack of personal emotional boundaries led to difficulties in my first marriage and extended the healing process. In what way is a lack of personal emotional boundaries creating a never-ending loop of disappointment in your relationships?

As you've experienced, a lack of clear boundaries leads to resentment and emotional turmoil. The resentment manifests as bitterness and uncontrollable anger. Identify areas of your life where your immediate reaction to someone else is anger or resentment. They are violating a boundary you need to identify or enforce clearly. Check out those areas and add what bothered you to your list of expectations.  

	More Food For Thought

Take a moment to look back at your answers to the first question I asked in this chapter - the ten ways in which you want others to treat you. Here’s an important question: do you treat others in those ways? If not, the work of learning self-respect begins with extending self-respect to others. 

It all goes back to what Jesus said two thousand years ago: “Do unto others as you would have them do unto you.” Simply put, treat others the way you wish to be treated, and they will be much more likely to return that respect.

