









CHAPTER SEVEN
PAIN IS SUPERFICIAL. IT GOES AWAY


“Pain is superficial. It goes away.” - Jason Crossman.


I know it's ludicrous to quote yourself in your own book, but so was my statement, so I find it apropos. When I was growing up, my best friend's dad owned a rock-laying company. This man is freakishly hard-working and a complete sucker for punishment. I mean, you would have to be a little sadistic to go into any form of masonry - especially in the Deep South - in 100+ degree heat. I have never seen a man work so hard in my entire life. During the very brief time I worked with him, he would wake us before the sun came up, haul our butts out to whatever God-forsaken job site he had us working on, and commence pulverizing us into dust with boulders. 
Ten to twelve hours and nine thousand pounds of rocks later, we would go home, sleep, and repeat. When we inevitably started to complain about the physical demands of the labor, he would assume the Hanz and Franz posture, shoulders back, chest out, terrible accent, and declare. "It's all a part of your training to make you stronger. No longer little girlie men." 

Physically, it hurt. It really hurt. And every muscle and bone in my body ached. Even my earlobes groaned in pain. One such day, when I dropped a rock that bounced off my leg, I declared, "I'm fine. Pain is superficial. It goes away." That became a funny go-to motto whenever something hurt me physically. And while it was effective at helping me laugh off minor bodily harm, I found the philosophy completely fell apart when someone or something broke my heart. That pain stays. 

I can easily recall some of the emotional wounds I received decades ago and instantly relive the experience. It's a large part of why we don't deal with emotional pain and instead try to sweep it under the rug. The sting of it hurts less over time, but the scars can remain for life, and when we recall those events, in a way, we experience the trauma all over again. No, thanks. 


Pain Has its Positives

“Time by itself heals nothing.” Thrall - World of Warcraft

Emotional, psychological, and spiritual pain comes from violated expectations. It is rejection, the loss of loved ones, and bodily harm. Pain is loneliness, abuse, and feeling unloved or unwanted. Pain is a lack of purpose and a loss of hope. Pain is a warning that something is not okay.
 
But pain is also an ally. It teaches us to let go of ourselves, sharpens us by building up perseverance, and strips away parts of us that are fragile and selfish, the characteristics of us that are not ready to receive or even recognize the more incredible blessings to come.  Pain rids us of useless fantasies and focuses our attention on the things and relationships that matter most. 

Before my divorce, I was very concerned about what people thought of me and feared rejection. I endured the worst rejection, assaults on my character, and abandonment, but I was still alive. In a weird way, pain was the key that liberated me from the fears that had dominated my mind. 

In the past, I held on tightly to what I loved; my hands clenched around it to keep from losing it. That meant sacrificing what I wanted most to keep my Ex happy. Now, I have learned to love with my hands open. My loved ones can leave anytime; I will not hold on to them. If they want to go, it will hurt, but I want to be with people who love me for who I am and who respect me. Pain taught me that, or rather, I learned by pressing through the pain and not running from it. 

Pain helps us appreciate the most valuable things in life. Pain allows us to celebrate victory, enjoy peace, and appreciate love. I think it is one of the reasons Jesus said, “No greater love has any man than this, that he lay down his life for his friends.” Pain is so terrible that when someone willingly chooses to go through pain to help us, it gives us a deeper understanding of what “I love you” means when someone says it.

Pain is an inevitable part of growth. Remember Life’s Gym? And while I do not recommend going out and looking for pain. I do encourage you to press into it. The long term impact of pain is a consequence we can minimize with wisdom. But no matter how hard we try to keep from getting hurt, in this life we can never avoid it. If your no other reason than people have free will and that means they have the ability to hurts me, no matter what precautions I take. As long as people have free will, there will be pain. When pain comes, the best way to have victory over it is to embrace it, wrestle it to the ground, and overcome it.

I would never want to go through what I did during my divorce again, but I would not change what happened to me. The man I became due to my struggle and the life I now have are too valuable and a direct result of overcoming hardship, focusing on healing, and being open to trying again. I know the suffering feels eternal and never-ending, but there will come a day when you are free. And if you don’t run away from the pain, that day will likely be sooner rather than later.  


A Great Time to See What Else Is There.

Pain allows us to examine deeper wounds. Wounds from your past are difficult to recall, and we often erect barriers that prevent us from dealing with them. We may hide them under layers of false pride or overconfidence. Or we may carry them as a constant inescapable pressure, thus taking on a woe-is-me attitude toward life. Regardless, when something as deeply traumatizing as divorce happens, the pain often shreds through our defensive barriers, exposing the raw emotions beneath. You can try and move to quickly cover the past wounds and insecurities before they spill out, but more often than not, the new pain will reinforce and falsely magnify the negative self-perceptions you already held. And unless you are willing to deal with pain, you will be doomed to repeat your failures, cementing it into your psyche. 

This is a form of what we call in communications a self-fulfilling prophecy. Through self-fulfilling prophecy, we look for experiences that support our beliefs and then use them to enforce those perceptions, often despite evidence to the contrary. 

What follows may not be what you want to hear - no more than hearing someone yelling “fire” in a crowded theater in the middle of your favorite movie - but alcohol, drugs, and promiscuity will not, in the long run, equip you to cope with reality.  To properly heal, those false ideas must be exposed, confronted, and replaced with truth. If willing to do the work, we can rebuild our foundational beliefs to serve us better. So you see, as terrible as it is, pain allows you an opportunity to break negative self-fulfilling cycles.

Example: I can refer to my brother-in-law. I love him dearly, but he got caught in the crossfire of a self-fulfilling prophecy that stemmed from past pain; both things that had been done to him and things he had brought upon himself. He was terrified that his wife would leave and take his children. He was so convinced she was always looking for someone better than him that he started down a slippery slope of questioning her about everything. Who was she with? What was she doing? Now, real or imagined, his fears kept tapping into unhealed past wounds that drove his emotions to unbearable heights. 

Through his obsession with avoiding pain, he ended up creating the very scenario he had wanted to avoid. It was difficult to see him lose his relationship with my sister, niece, and nephew and then the subsequent spiral into despair. His story is a stark warning of the importance of dealing with our brokenness in the healthiest way possible. We don’t want to experience this type of loss again. It hurts too much, so we need to be open and honest about how we got where we are and what can be done to change ourselves so it doesn’t happen again. 

In my own brokeness, I said, "Let's deal with whatever is down here so I never have to break like this again." I discovered some wounds from my past that impacted how I perceived my worth and value. There was one particular phrase that kept coming up over and over. "You have so much potential, but…" It was always the but that got me. People saw something great in me, but something extraordinary was always out of reach. If I could only do X-Y-Z, then I would be able to become great. It always felt like a carrot on a pole dangling before me. I tried hard to be enough to get rid of the “but”. I wanted to make myself more organized, more disciplined, more perfect. However, I'm not sure I ever can. Can we ever fully live up to other people's expectations? Like the carrot, it's a goalpost that is constantly moving away. 


Nice, But…

I was a very energetic child, and while some label my thought processes as an ADD disorder, I label it as highly creative, upward-reaching, optimistic, and hands-on. I never excelled at sitting at a desk all day, and to this day, I still have a hard time confined to my desk. For my mom, I was willing to study harder to get better grades. For my father, it was a way of applying myself toward my goals, not making bad choices, and not giving up so easily. For my teachers, it was sitting still, following the rules, and taking my tests. One of my teachers told my mom when she was worrying, "Jason is going to make an incredible adult; we just have to get him through high school." 

I am now laregely free from the weight of people's expectations, a freedom I could only reach because the experience broke me. By tearing down the walls that had protected my ego and exposing my inner soul, I found freedom I desperately needed, even though I hadn’t recognized it at the time. 

So, the next time you get bad news from your attorney and you feel your body go limp from the pain, when you start to retreat into your emotional cocoon, remember your situation is not forever. And while you are withdrawing, think of the pain like a light, a horrible, terrible, annoying little light, and allow the pain to take you wherever it wants to go. Please don't stop it. Allow it to probe your past. Your fear. Your failure. Allow it to touch the darker corners of your mind. 

I always ask myself questions whenever pain exposes something. Why does that hurt so much? Why do I get angry when someone says that phrase? Why do I want to be alone? Why am I hiding that part of myself?

If you're having trouble separating yourself from your pain and it's all you can see, try this: Imagine you are a character in your own story. Like Clint Eastwood, you’re a writer, director, and lead actor; the guy you’re playing has just lost his wife. What is he doing? Picture yourself as the viewer, watching the movie from the comfort of your couch. Then ask yourself, "What would make this scene better?" He could be crying in pain and pounding the wall. Maybe he falls on the floor and shakes. As silly as it sounds, taking a moment to see yourself in the third person allows you a different perspective on what you are facing. 

Then, ask more questions from there. Why does he even like that girl anyway? She's horrible to him. She has been for years. Why did that guy let her take advantage of him for so long? What made him so weak, and why didn't he stand up for himself? Why doesn't he say no?

Once you are conscious enough to start objectively asking questions about what you think and feel when you break, you can uncover the thoughts and ideas behind many of the deep emotional scars you carry. The exercise is beautiful because it also helps you discover answers to what you can do about your situation today and what you need to change your boundaries to ensure you are not adding your current suffering to the baggage of the past. As the director of the movie of your life, you can yell, “CUT!”

Humans can accomplish many things, both internally and externally, but there are some things we need help with. While exercises like the ones I propose are excellent at relieving pain and pointing us in the right direction, they can only do so much. They cannot replace the holes left by the pain and the longing we have in our souls to be fully known and fully loved. It's impossible for anyone or anything to fill them. Anything you put over the hole will only be a type of band-aid. 


The Way to Golgotha.

I discovered that to completely heal, I had to lay my pain and its crushing burden down at the foot of Christ’s cross. The death of Christ, whether you consider it actual or symbolic, expressed the supreme pinnacle of human suffering and the merger of love, meaning, and purpose all in one place and at one moment. At the moment of his death, he experienced excruciating pain and claimed he did it for others, for us. He endured the pain now, so we don't have to bear the pain eternally. 

We can find healing in His life, death, and resurrection. Jesus demonstrated how pain transforms us into free, loving, holy people. When we go through the crucible of pain and die to ourselves, we lay down our burdens, and then we can truly live. It's the supreme example of what I spoke of earlier in the chapter. Once I had gone through the crucible of fear, rejection, and failure and came out on the other side, those things no longer held me. I survived and thrived, and now I do not fear rejection. I don't fear failure. I still feel the pain. I'm not too fond of it. But it doesn't get to hold onto me. I have been set free.

God is the only source of deep, lasting, and eternal healing. The healing that comes from God goes beyond anything we experience. It turns our pain into something beautiful - much like a lump of coal is turned into a diamond by applying relentless heat and pressure - and unites us with the entire human story. 

The book of Hebrews, in the New Testament of the Bible, talks about it so eloquently when it says, "Therefore since we are surrounded by such a great cloud of witnesses, let us throw off everything that hinders and the sin that so easily entangles. And let us run with perseverance the race marked out for us." We are part of something greater, writing our lives into the fabric of human history and being cheered on! We can pull from the stories of others, past and present, and find support and encouragement to persevere here and now.

 And we can add our own story, helping people generations from now. Pain is not the end. It is the beginning. What would that guy on the couch do with his life if he could get up, brush himself off, and overcome the pain? Who could he become? I'm sure he's got some extraordinary dreams.

Pain Is Energy

I have experienced significant pain in my life. A drunk driver killed my girlfriend in college. Another great friend met the same fate at the hands of an intoxicated motorist six months later. I lost three grandparents, jobs, and financial troubles in rapid succession. While those were terrible, they were temporary one-time events I could grieve and move on. It was not until my wife left and took our child with her that I understood long-term suffering and the deep pain stemming from daily rejection and abandonment. It was devastating and relentless.

Divorce, custody battles, chronic pain, war, the loss of a child, and infidelity leave deep scars. If life has taught me anything, it has taught me that more pain will come, compounding whatever remains unresolved. Even as I write this book, I’m facing loss—two friends gone, one from a vaccine complication, the other from a hit-and-run. My wife’s country is under Russian invasion, with family hiding in bunkers; my father is battling cancer. Unfulfilled dreams, civil unrest, a shaky film industry, and global instability loom large. I’m sure you can relate.

What we must do - what you must do - regardless of whether you want to or not, is prioritize that thing over which you have no control and those you do. Then, ignore the former and deal with the latter. 

This is important: the chance you will take the pain and emotional damage into your next relationship is high unless you deal with it now.

One of the methods I have used to deal with pain is to consider pain more like a currency distributed in the form of energy. (I'm speaking of psychological distress.) When we experience trauma of any kind, it sends the nociceptor neurons in our nervous systems into a tizzy. A psychologist would say it creates a kind of inflammatory soup and transmits pain signals through the excitatory neurotransmitter glutamate all over our body. All that information tickles the somatosensory cortex, hypothalamus, and hippocampus, activating the brain to respond. The brain puts a negative spin on the overload and sends signals back to our heart, lungs and spine, telling our body, “Something’s wrong! Freak out!” all the while desperately in search of the source of pain to end it. 

The same mechanism tells you to take your hand off a hot stove, but in situations that are highly emotional rather than physical, it’s confused as to where the pain is coming from, so it just sends out a system-wide “S-O-S” without offering any really helpful solutions. But shutting off the alarm doesn’t seem to be an option; it just cranks up the volume. “Something’s wrong! Freak Out! Freak Out!” When there’s no quick solution, we must endure the pain. However, with a fair amount of practice, we can “capture” those negative feelings and energies and convert them into something positive. We can train ourselves to understand that the whole world isn’t falling apart. However, it may feel like it has. Gravity hasn’t all of a sudden ceased to function. The sky is still overhead. The stars are in place. Rivers run, flowers grow, and babies are born. You get the picture. It’s just our little corner that’s in chaos. Realizing this helps to localize the source of our pain and take steps to respond to it in a manner more likely to affect a positive outcome.

Pain: The Good and the Ugly Kinds

Sugar entering the body doesn't come out as sugar. It converts into energy. Likewise, sex has incredible power and a myriad of results across the body. Pain, too, creates energy that, in and of itself, is indifferent relative to positivity or negativity. It’s not much different from electrical energy, which doesn’t choose or care where it goes, whether to power a life-saving piece of medical hardware or an electric chair. It’s our response to the indiscriminate energy of pain that determines outcomes. 

Our natural response to someone inflicting pain on us is to lash out. It’s a negative response, and it rarely produces positive outcomes unless it is the nuclear option we discussed earlier. It’s the atomic bomb to relationships. So, recognizing this, we lasso it, take control of it, and redirect it in a way more likely to produce a positive response. 

 If I recognize the anger I feel from pain, the ache it causes, and my desire to lash out as energy, I can choose to do something else with it. I don't have to lash out. Instead, I can turn it into something constructive. There’s no law that says we have to respond in kind, to lash out when we are lashed upon, to yell when we’re yelled at, to throw and break things when things are being thrown and broken around us. 

We have a choice. We have the power to tell ourselves, “Cut! This scene isn’t working. It's time for a rewrite.” 
We refuse to be taken captive by our gut response. Even if we can’t control the situation, we can control ourselves.

In times of high negative emotion, when fuses are short and tempers are flaring, it’s better, wiser, more mature, and more responsible to be water rather than sulfur.

On one occasion, I was experiencing some frustration with a project. I don't recall the particulars, but I had been sitting at my desk and fuming while getting increasingly frustrated that I was not progressing with anything I was working on. Suddenly, the thought hit me. What I felt, the anger building up inside me, was just energy. And I could use it to do something else. I got up from my desk, honest with myself, because I knew I would not finish what I was working on. 

I found my lovely bride, the woman I've been with for the past ten years, and asked her, "Is there anything you've wanted done around the house that you haven't been able to finish and would like done today?" She smiled a big, beautiful smile that made me feel better instantly. She had wanted some new safety outlets in our bedrooms. So I grabbed my tools, tore out the old outlets, and installed all new ones. Then I painted one of the guest rooms and took out all the trash. I used anger to serve my wife, and with the positive momentum I built serving my wife and taking care of my home, I returned to my desk and finished the project far more quickly than usual. 

It was a conscious choice to acknowledge how I was feeling, recognize it as energy, and then use it to accomplish something else I needed to get done. I could have used my anger to curse the person causing it. I could have used my frustration to destroy my office by throwing chairs or consciously trying to do something good. Serving my wife enabled me to take the focus off of myself and put it on her. My goodwill and love for her overrode my anger, tamping the emotion and converting the frustration into physical labor. 

Physical exertion is another incredible way to redirect anger and pain. I spent a lot of time at the gym. I have a love-hate relationship with it. I get highly bored working out, but I love how it makes me feel, and the results in my body vastly outweigh any negatives. I gained almost twenty pounds of muscle during my divorce and subsequent custody case. Working out helped my posture and gave me confidence, energy, and a positive outlet for converting frustration into physical labor. 

Pain does not have to be the end of you, but you can use it to create a new beginning, focusing on the goals you set for yourself in the previous chapters. Any time you get lost, focus on who you are and what you will achieve. Say it out loud. 

Have a Schedule

If you’re not big into scheduling your day, you miss out on a fantastic tool to give you a sense of order. When your world has been flung into chaos, and you feel entirely out of control, having order to your day to fall back on will make the mess of healing that much more meaningful. You cannot control your Ex, you cannot control the court system, the judges, or those who are spending time with your kids when they are with their mom, but you can participate in things you can control. Get out of bed on time, get dressed in something nice when you go out, and brush your teeth. Plan one meal. Things you know you can do that give you small wins will go a long way to creating something stable you can stand on while your world is spinning. It also looks better in court when you have your stuff together. 



Gratitude As a Weapon

A powerful tool is available for you when you are overwhelmed with pain or anxiety: gratitude. We'll talk more about it in a later chapter, but understanding appreciation can change your focus, support your immune system, promote happiness, and give you incredible strength to persevere when you are suffering. When we are in pain, we focus everything on the source of the trauma and the eradication of it. It's not a bad thing for short-term solutions like a bear chewing your arm, but for long-term emotional suffering, when you cannot simply run away, it can be very damaging. 

Whenever my life overwhelms me with negative thoughts and feelings, I declare everything I am thankful for out loud. While it may seem everything in our lives is terrible and over, the truth is many things are good. When we shift our focus to some of those, it puts the pain into perspective. It doesn't make it go away; it simply aligns it with the total reality of life. 

At the time, I forced myself to express this gratitude. Yes, my wife left, and she took our child. Yes, divorce is destroying my finances and I am facing contempt charges for failure to refinance my house, but I have amazing friends. My parents, sister, and extended family love me and support me. I am passionate about my work. Life was pretty good. It might be: My car is a convertible, and it's sunny! Or: I live in my favorite town on the ocean. Whatever those things are in your life, express gratitude for them and for the people who love you and support you right now. 

It was also a time to make declarations for things I wanted to have happen. I’d declare: I’m thankful I will make more money than ever before my divorce. I'm grateful I will find love again and do it better this time. I appreciate the opportunity to heal from past trauma; I will be a healthier and happier person. 
Forward-focused gratitude pushes your subconscious attention into the future, focusing your consciousness on what you want to happen. In the next chapter you will learn of the power this action has to manifest an entirely new and successful trajectory for your life. It’s not a genie in a bottle, but it sets your ship toward the right harbor. 

Go ahead and try it: I'm thankful for my sister, who goes out of her way to help me take care of my daughter when she is with me and allows me to clean the house. I'm grateful for work I can pour my energy into that provides for my home. I appreciate my friend Matt, who will take my phone call, no matter the time of day, letting me pour my heart out to him. I freaking love my sports car that I can take and get away. 
For the exercise to be effective, you need to practice it daily. It's the first thing I do when I wake up and the last thing I do before I go to bed. And I do it whenever my emotions and anger start to overwhelm me or when I feel out of control. 

I also express gratitude for the things I am learning during the suffering. I'm thankful I am becoming more patient. I'm learning to appreciate the value of true love. I'm setting boundaries that will give me more profound satisfaction in my relationships. I'm thankful for the opportunity to grow. What? Opportunity? Yes! It is. It's not what we want, but it is the chance to get something we need. It’s counter-intuitive, but it works! 
 
Food For Thought

I hope I’ve shown you that pain is not just an unpleasant sensation but a multifaceted experience with the potential to teach, transform, and lead you to a deeper level of self-awareness. A deep level of self-awareness can lead to more prosperous relationships with fully developed and self-actualized boundaries. Additionally, you will be creating perseverance, which is what works in and through you to ensure you are a complete and mature person.

 What are some constructive ways you can re-direct your anger? Sports? Wrestling? Chopping ice? You know you will have good and bad days on your journey to healing. Have some ideas ahead of time for what you can do so you’re not trying to decide in the middle of your anger.

What are some of the lessons you have learned from your pain in the past? If your first thought was, don’t trust people, then, you can change that into learning to develop better boundaries, so you have a greater chance of building relationships with people you can trust. 

Have you ever experienced pain you were not able to push through? If you are reading this, then you have had pain before, and you found ways to get through. You might not have thrived, but you survived. Since you already know you’ve done it before, you can be confident you can do it this time, too.  

Don’t forget the power of gratitude. 













